"So very strangely," she rejoined in a low voice, scarcely audible.

"However, he's a good-natured old gentleman," said John, "and pays as a
gentleman, and I think his word is to be relied upon, like a
gentleman's. I had quite a long talk with him this morning: he can hear
me better already, he says, as he gets more used to my voice. He told me
a great deal about himself, and I told him a good deal about myself, and
a rare lot of questions he asked me. I gave him information about my
having two beats, you know, in my business; one day to the right from
our house and back again; another day to the left from our house and
back again (for he's a stranger, and don't know the names of places
about here); and he seemed quite pleased. 'Why, then I shall be
returning home to-night your way,' he says, 'when I thought you'd be
coming in an exactly opposite direction. That's capital! I may trouble
you for another lift, perhaps, but I'll engage not to fall so sound
asleep again.' He _was_ sound asleep, sure-ly!--Dot! what are you
thinking of?"

"Thinking of, John? I--I was listening to you."

"Oh! That's all right!" said the honest Carrier. "I was afraid, from the
look of your face, that I had gone rambling on so long as to set you
thinking about something else. I was very near it, I'll be bound."

Dot making no reply, they jogged on, for some little time, in silence.
But, it was not easy to remain silent very long in John Peerybingle's
cart, for everybody on the road had something to say. Though it might
only be "How are you?" and, indeed, it was very often nothing else,
still, to give that back again in the right spirit of cordiality,
required, not merely a nod and a smile, but as wholesome an action of
the lungs withal as a long-winded Parliamentary speech. Sometimes,
passengers on foot, or horseback, plodded on a little way beside the
cart, for the express purpose of having a chat; and then there was a
great deal to be said on both sides.

Then, Boxer gave occasion to more good-natured recognitions of, and by,
the Carrier, than half-a-dozen Christians could have done! Everybody
knew him all along the road--especially the fowls and pigs, who, when
they saw him approaching, with his body all on one side, and his ears
pricked up inquisitively, and that knob of a tail making the most of
itself in the air, immediately withdrew into remote back-settlements,
without waiting for the honour of a nearer acquaintance. He had business
elsewhere; going down all the turnings, looking into all the wells,
bolting in and out of all the cottages, dashing into the midst of all
the Dame Schools, fluttering all the pigeons, magnifying the tails of
all the cats, and trotting into the public-houses like a regular
customer. Wherever he went, somebody or other might have been heard to
cry, "Halloa! here's Boxer!" and out came that somebody forthwith,
accompanied by at least two or three other somebodies, to give John
Peerybingle and his pretty wife Good day.

The packages and parcels for the errand cart were numerous; and there
were many stoppages to take them in and give them out, which were not by
any means the worst parts of the journey. Some people were so full of
expectation about their parcels, and other people were so full of wonder
about their parcels, and other people were so full of inexhaustible
directions about their parcels, and John had such a lively interest in
all the parcels, that it was as good as a play. Likewise, there were
articles to carry, which required to be considered and discussed, and in
reference to the adjustment and disposition of which councils had to be
holden by the Carrier and the senders: at which Boxer usually assisted,
in short fits of the closest attention, and long fits of tearing round
and round the assembled sages, and barking himself hoarse. Of all these
little incidents, Dot was the amused and open-eyed spectatress from her
chair in the cart; and as she sat there, looking on--a charming little
portrait framed to admiration by the tilt--there was no lack of nudgings
and glancings and whisperings and envyings among the younger men. And
this delighted John the Carrier beyond measure; for he was proud to have
his little wife admired, knowing that she didn't mind it--that, if
anything, she rather liked it perhaps.

The trip was a little foggy, to be sure, in the January weather; and was
raw and cold. But who cared for such trifles? Not Dot, decidedly. Not
Tilly Slowboy, for she deemed sitting in a cart, on any terms, to be the
highest point of human joys; the crowning circumstance of earthly hope.
Not the Baby, I'll be sworn; for it's not in Baby nature to be warmer or
more sound asleep, though its capacity is great in both respects, than
that blessed young Peerybingle was, all the way.

You couldn't see very far in the fog, of course; but you could see a
great deal! It's astonishing how much you may see in a thicker fog than
that, if you will only take the trouble to look for it. Why, even to sit
watching for the Fairyrings in the fields, and for the patches of hoar
frost still lingering in the shade, near hedges and by trees, was a
pleasant occupation, to make no mention of the unexpected shapes in
which the trees themselves came starting out of the mist, and glided
into it again. The hedges were tangled and bare, and waved a multitude
of blighted garlands in the wind; but there was no discouragement in
this. It was agreeable to contemplate; for it made the fireside warmer
in possession, and the summer greener in expectancy. The river looked
chilly; but it was in motion, and moving at a good pace--which was a
great point. The canal was rather slow and torpid; that must be
admitted. Never mind. It would freeze the sooner when the frost set
fairly in, and then there would be skating and sliding; and the heavy
old barges, frozen up somewhere near a wharf, would smoke their rusty
iron chimney-pipes all day, and have a lazy time of it.

In one place there was a great mound of weeds or stubble burning; and
they watched the fire, so white in the daytime, flaring through the fog,
with only here and there a dash of red in it, until, in consequence, as
she observed, of the smoke "getting up her nose," Miss Slowboy
choked--she could do anything of that sort, on the smallest
provocation--and woke the Baby, who wouldn't go to sleep again. But
Boxer, who was in advance some quarter of a mile or so, had already
passed the outposts of the town, and gained the corner of the street
where Caleb and his daughter lived; and, long before they had reached
the door, he and the Blind Girl were on the pavement waiting to receive
them.


