"No, we don't know better," interposed John. "What are you talking
about?"

"Well! We _don't_ know better, then," said Tackleton. "We'll agree that
we don't. As you like; what does it matter? I was going to say, as you
have that sort of appearance, your company will produce a favourable
effect on Mrs. Tackleton that will be. And, though I don't think your
good lady's very friendly to me in this matter, still she can't help
herself from falling into my views, for there's a compactness and
cosiness of appearance about her that always tells, even in an
indifferent case. You'll say you'll come?"

"We have arranged to keep our Wedding-day (as far as that goes) at
home," said John. "We have made the promise to ourselves these six
months. We think, you see, that home--"

"Bah! what's home?" cried Tackleton. "Four walls and a ceiling! (Why
don't you kill that Cricket? _I_ would! I always do. I hate their
noise.) There are four walls and a ceiling at my house. Come to me!"

"You kill your Crickets, eh?" said John.

"Scrunch 'em, sir," returned the other, setting his heel heavily on the
floor. "You'll say you'll come? It's as much your interest as mine, you
know, that the women should persuade each other that they're quiet and
contented, and couldn't be better off. I know their way. Whatever one
woman says, another woman is determined to clinch always. There's that
spirit of emulation among 'em, sir, that if your wife says to my wife,
'I'm the happiest woman in the world, and mine's the best husband in the
world, and I dote on him,' my wife will say the same to yours, or more,
and half believe it."

"Do you mean to say she don't, then?" asked the Carrier.

"Don't!" cried Tackleton with a short, sharp laugh. "Don't what?"

The Carrier had some faint idea of adding, "dote upon you." But,
happening to meet the half-closed eye, as it twinkled upon him over the
turned-up collar of the cape, which was within an ace of poking it out,
he felt it such an unlikely part and parcel of anything to be doted on,
that he substituted, "that she don't believe it?"

"Ah, you dog! You're joking," said Tackleton.

But the Carrier, though slow to understand the full drift of his
meaning, eyed him in such a serious manner, that he was obliged to be a
little more explanatory.

"I have the humour," said Tackleton: holding up the fingers of his left
hand, and tapping the forefinger, to imply, "There I am, Tackleton to
wit": "I have the humour, sir, to marry a young wife, and a pretty
wife": here he rapped his little finger, to express the Bride; not
sparingly, but sharply; with a sense of power. "I'm able to gratify that
humour, and I do. It's my whim. But--now look there!"

He pointed to where Dot was sitting, thoughtfully before the fire:
leaning her dimpled chin upon her hand, and watching the bright blaze.
The Carrier looked at her, and then at him, and then at her, and then at
him again.

"She honours and obeys, no doubt, you know," said Tackleton; "and that,
as I am not a man of sentiment, is quite enough for _me_. But do you
think there's anything more in it?"

"I think," observed the Carrier, "that I should chuck any man out of
window who said there wasn't."

"Exactly so," returned the other with an unusual alacrity of assent. "To
be sure! Doubtless you would. Of course. I'm certain of it. Good night.
Pleasant dreams!"

The Carrier was puzzled, and made uncomfortable and uncertain, in spite
of himself. He couldn't help showing it in his manner.

"Good night, my dear friend!" said Tackleton compassionately. "I'm off.
We're exactly alike in reality, I see. You won't give us to-morrow
evening? Well! Next day you go out visiting, I know. I'll meet you
there, and bring my wife that is to be. It'll do her good. You're
agreeable? Thankee. What's that?"

It was a loud cry from the Carrier's wife: a loud, sharp, sudden cry,
that made the room ring like a glass vessel. She had risen from her
seat, and stood like one transfixed by terror and surprise. The Stranger
had advanced towards the fire to warm himself, and stood within a short
stride of her chair. But quite still.

"Dot!" cried the Carrier. "Mary! Darling! What's the matter?"

They were all about her in a moment. Caleb, who had been dozing on the
cake-box, in the first imperfect recovery of his suspended presence of
mind, seized Miss Slowboy by the hair of her head, but immediately
apologised.

"Mary!" exclaimed the Carrier, supporting her in his arms. "Are you ill?
What is it? Tell me dear!"

She only answered by beating her hands together, and falling into a wild
fit of laughter. Then, sinking from his grasp upon the ground, she
covered her face with her apron, and wept bitterly. And then, she
laughed again, and then she cried again, and then she said how cold she
was, and suffered him to lead her to the fire, where she sat down as
before. The old man standing, as before, quite still.

"I'm better, John," she said. "I'm quite well now--I----"

"John!" But John was on the other side of her. Why turn her face towards
the strange old gentleman, as if addressing him. Was her brain
wandering?

"Only a fancy, John dear--a kind of shock--a something coming suddenly
before my eyes--I don't know what it was. It's quite gone, quite gone."

"I'm glad it's gone," muttered Tackleton, turning the expressive eye all
round the room. "I wonder where it's gone, and what it was. Humph!
Caleb, come here! Who's that with the grey hair?"

"I don't know, sir," returned Caleb in a whisper. "Never see him before
in all my life. A beautiful figure for a nut-cracker; quite a new model.
With a screw-jaw opening down into his waistcoat, he'd be lovely."

"Not ugly enough," said Tackleton.

"Or for a fire-box either," observed Caleb in deep contemplation, "what
a model! Unscrew his head to put the matches in; turn him heels up'ards
for the light; and what a fire-box for a gentleman's mantel-shelf, just
as he stands!"


