It is probable that the gods act in the same manner, that they
show greater indulgence to some for the sake of their parents and
their ancestry, and to others for the sake of their children and
grandchildren, and a long line of descendants beyond them; for they
know the whole course of their works, and have constant access to the
knowledge of all that shall hereafter pass through their hands. These
things come upon us from the unknown future, and the gods have foreseen
and are familiar with the events by which we are startled. "Let these
men," says Providence, "be kings, because their ancestors were good
kings, because they regarded righteousness and temperance as the highest
rule of life, because they did not devote the state to themselves, but
devoted themselves to the state. Let these others reign, because some
one of their ancestors before them was a good man, who bore a soul
superior to fortune, who preferred to be conquered rather than to
conquer in civil strife, because it was more to the advantage of
the state. [Footnote: Gertz, "Stud. Crit," p. 159, note.] It was not
possible to make a sufficient return to him for this during so long a
time; let this other, therefore, out of regard for him, be chief of the
people, not because he knows how, or is capable, but because the other
has earned it for him. This man is misshapen, loathsome to look upon,
and will disgrace the insignia of his office. Men will presently blame
me, calling me blind and reckless, not knowing upon whom I am conferring
what ought to be given to the greatest and noblest of men; but I know
that, in giving this dignity to one man, I am paying an old debt to
another. How should the men of to-day know that ancient hero, who so
resolutely avoided the glory which pressed upon him, who went into
danger with the same look which other men wear when they have escaped
from danger, who never regarded his own interest as apart from that
of the commonwealth?" "Where," you ask, "or who is he? whence does
he come?" "You know him not; it lies with me to balance the debit and
credit account in such cases as these; I know how much I owe to each
man; I repay some after a long interval, others beforehand, according
as my opportunities and the exigencies of my social system permit."
I shall, therefore, sometimes bestow somewhat upon an ungrateful man,
though not for his own sake.


