It is not disgraceful to be worsted by these men, for I am not the
less brave because you pit me against an invulnerable enemy, nor does
fire not burn because you throw into it something over which flames have
no power, nor does iron lose its power of cutting, though you may wish
to cut up a stone which is hard, impervious to blows, and of such a
nature that hard tools are blunted upon it. I give you the same answer
about gratitude. A man is not disgracefully worsted in a contest of
benefits if he lays himself under an obligation to such persons
as these, whose enormous wealth or admirable virtue shut out all
possibility of their benefits being returned. As a rule we are worsted
by our parents; for while we have them with us, we regard them as
severe, and do not understand what they do for us. When our age begins
to bring us a little sense, and we gradually perceive that they deserve
our love for those very things which used to prevent our loving them,
their advice, their punishments, and the careful watch which they used
to keep over our youthful recklessness, they are taken from us. Few live
to reap any real fruit from children; most men feel their sons only as
a burden. Yet there is no disgrace in being worsted by one's parent
in bestowing benefits; how should there be, seeing that there is no
disgrace in being worsted by anyone. We are equal to some men, and yet
not equal; equal in intention, which is all that they care for, which
is all that we promise to be, but unequal in fortune. And if fortune
prevents any one from repaying a kindness, he need not, therefore,
blush, as though he were vanquished; there is no disgrace in failing
to reach your object, provided you attempt to reach it. It often is
necessary, that before making any return for the benefits which we have
received, we should ask for new ones; yet, if so, we shall not refrain
from asking for them, nor shall we do so as though disgraced by so
doing, because, even if we do not repay the debt, we shall owe it;
because, even if something from without befalls us to prevent our
repaying it, it will not be our fault if we are not grateful. We can
neither be conquered in intention, nor can we be disgraced by yielding
to what is beyond our strength to contend with.

