Not to return gratitude for benefits, my AEbutius Liberalis, is
both base in itself, and is thought base by all men; wherefore even
ungrateful men complain of ingratitude, and yet what all condemn is at
the same time rooted in all; and so far do men sometimes run into the
other extreme that some of them become our bitterest enemies, not merely
after receiving benefits from us, but because they have received them.
I cannot deny that some do this out of sheer badness of nature; but
more do so because lapse of time destroys their remembrance, for time
gradually effaces what they felt vividly at the moment. I remember
having had an argument with you about this class of persons, whom you
wished to call forgetful rather than ungrateful, as if that which caused
a man to be ungrateful was any excuse for his being so, or as if the
fact of this happening to a man prevented his being ungrateful, when we
know that it only happens to ungrateful men. There are many classes of
the ungrateful, as there are of thieves or of homicides, who all have
the same fault, though there is a great variety in its various forms.
The man is ungrateful who denies that he has received a benefit; who
pretends that he has not received it; who does not return it. The most
ungrateful man of all is he who forgets it. The others, though they do
not repay it, yet feel their debt, and possess some traces of worth,
though obstructed by their bad conscience. They may by some means and at
some time be brought to show their gratitude, if, for instance, they
be pricked by shame, if they conceive some noble ambition such as
occasionally rises even in the breasts of the wicked, if some easy
opportunity of doing so offers; but the man from whom all recollection
of the benefit has passed away can never become grateful. Which of the
two do you call the worse--he who is ungrateful for kindness, or he who
does not even remember it? The eyes which fear to look at the light are
diseased, but those which cannot see it are blind. It is filial impiety
not to love one's parents, but not to recognise them is madness.

