AEneas conquered his father in well doing, for he himself had
been but a light and a safe burden for him when he was a child, yet he
bore his father, when heavy with age, through the midst of the enemy's
lines and the crash of the city which was falling around him, albeit the
devout old man, who bore the sacred images and the household gods in
his hands, pressed him with more than his own weight; nevertheless
(what cannot filial piety accomplish!) AEneas bore him safe through the
blazing city, and placed him in safety, to be worshipped as one of the
founders of the Roman Empire. Those Sicilian youths outdid their parents
whom they bore away safe, when Aetna, roused to unusual fury, poured
fire over cities and fields throughout a great part of the island. It
is believed that the fires parted, and that the flames retired on either
side, so as to leave a passage for these youths to pass through, who
certainly deserved to perform their daring task in safety. Antigonus
outdid his father when, after having conquered the enemy in a great
battle, he transferred the fruits of it to him, and handed over to him
the empire of Cyprus. This is true kingship, to choose not to be a king
when you might. Manlius conquered his father, imperious [Footnote:
There is an allusion to the surname of both the father and the son,
"Imperiosus" given them on account of their severity.] though he was,
when, in spite of his having previously been banished for a time by his
father on, account of his dulness and stupidity as a boy, he came to an
interview which he had demanded with the tribune of the people, who
had filed an action against his father. The tribune had granted him the
interview, hoping that he would betray his hated father, and believed
that he had earned the gratitude of the youth, having, amongst other
matters, reproached old Manlius with sending him into exile, treating
it as a very serious accusation; but the youth, having caught him alone,
drew a sword which he had hidden in his robe, and said, "Unless you
swear to give up your suit against my father, I will run you through
with this sword. It is in your power to decide how my father shall be
freed from his prosecutor." The tribune swore, and kept his oath; he
related the reason of his abandonment of his action to an assembly at
the Rostra. No other man was ever permitted to put down a tribune with
impunity.


