He was glad for one thing: the rope was off his neck. That had given
them an unfair advantage; but now that it was off, he would show them.
They would never get another rope around his neck. Upon that he was
resolved. For two days and nights he neither ate nor drank, and during
those two days and nights of torment, he accumulated a fund of wrath
that boded ill for whoever first fell foul of him. His eyes turned
blood-shot, and he was metamorphosed into a raging fiend. So changed was
he that the Judge himself would not have recognized him; and the express
messengers breathed with relief when they bundled him off the train at
Seattle.

Four men gingerly carried the crate from the wagon into a small,
high-walled back yard. A stout man, with a red sweater that sagged
generously at the neck, came out and signed the book for the driver.
That was the man, Buck divined, the next tormentor, and he hurled
himself savagely against the bars. The man smiled grimly, and brought a
hatchet and a club.

"You ain't going to take him out now?" the driver asked.

"Sure," the man replied, driving the hatchet into the crate for a pry.

There was an instantaneous scattering of the four men who had carried
it in, and from safe perches on top the wall they prepared to watch the
performance.

Buck rushed at the splintering wood, sinking his teeth into it, surging
and wrestling with it. Wherever the hatchet fell on the outside, he was
there on the inside, snarling and growling, as furiously anxious to get
out as the man in the red sweater was calmly intent on getting him out.

"Now, you red-eyed devil," he said, when he had made an opening
sufficient for the passage of Buck's body. At the same time he dropped
the hatchet and shifted the club to his right hand.

And Buck was truly a red-eyed devil, as he drew himself together for the
spring, hair bristling, mouth foaming, a mad glitter in his blood-shot
eyes. Straight at the man he launched his one hundred and forty pounds
of fury, surcharged with the pent passion of two days and nights. In
mid air, just as his jaws were about to close on the man, he received
a shock that checked his body and brought his teeth together with an
agonizing clip. He whirled over, fetching the ground on his back and
side. He had never been struck by a club in his life, and did not
understand. With a snarl that was part bark and more scream he was again
on his feet and launched into the air. And again the shock came and he
was brought crushingly to the ground. This time he was aware that it was
the club, but his madness knew no caution. A dozen times he charged, and
as often the club broke the charge and smashed him down.

After a particularly fierce blow, he crawled to his feet, too dazed to
rush. He staggered limply about, the blood flowing from nose and mouth
and ears, his beautiful coat sprayed and flecked with bloody slaver.
Then the man advanced and deliberately dealt him a frightful blow on
the nose. All the pain he had endured was as nothing compared with the
exquisite agony of this. With a roar that was almost lionlike in its
ferocity, he again hurled himself at the man. But the man, shifting the
club from right to left, coolly caught him by the under jaw, at the same
time wrenching downward and backward. Buck described a complete circle
in the air, and half of another, then crashed to the ground on his head
and chest.

For the last time he rushed. The man struck the shrewd blow he had
purposely withheld for so long, and Buck crumpled up and went down,
knocked utterly senseless.

"He's no slouch at dog-breakin', that's wot I say," one of the men on
the wall cried enthusiastically.

"Druther break cayuses any day, and twice on Sundays," was the reply of
the driver, as he climbed on the wagon and started the horses.

Buck's senses came back to him, but not his strength. He lay where he
had fallen, and from there he watched the man in the red sweater.

"'Answers to the name of Buck,'" the man soliloquized, quoting from the
saloon-keeper's letter which had announced the consignment of the crate
and contents. "Well, Buck, my boy," he went on in a genial voice, "we've
had our little ruction, and the best thing we can do is to let it go at
that. You've learned your place, and I know mine. Be a good dog and all
'll go well and the goose hang high. Be a bad dog, and I'll whale the
stuffin' outa you. Understand?"

As he spoke he fearlessly patted the head he had so mercilessly pounded,
and though Buck's hair involuntarily bristled at touch of the hand,
he endured it without protest. When the man brought him water he drank
eagerly, and later bolted a generous meal of raw meat, chunk by chunk,
from the man's hand.

He was beaten (he knew that); but he was not broken. He saw, once for
all, that he stood no chance against a man with a club. He had learned
the lesson, and in all his after life he never forgot it. That club was
a revelation. It was his introduction to the reign of primitive law,
and he met the introduction halfway. The facts of life took on a fiercer
aspect; and while he faced that aspect uncowed, he faced it with all the
latent cunning of his nature aroused. As the days went by, other dogs
came, in crates and at the ends of ropes, some docilely, and some raging
and roaring as he had come; and, one and all, he watched them pass
under the dominion of the man in the red sweater. Again and again, as he
looked at each brutal performance, the lesson was driven home to Buck:
a man with a club was a lawgiver, a master to be obeyed, though not
necessarily conciliated. Of this last Buck was never guilty, though he
did see beaten dogs that fawned upon the man, and wagged their tails,
and licked his hand. Also he saw one dog, that would neither conciliate
nor obey, finally killed in the struggle for mastery.

Now and again men came, strangers, who talked excitedly, wheedlingly,
and in all kinds of fashions to the man in the red sweater. And at such
times that money passed between them the strangers took one or more of
the dogs away with them. Buck wondered where they went, for they never
came back; but the fear of the future was strong upon him, and he was
glad each time when he was not selected.

Yet his time came, in the end, in the form of a little weazened man who
spat broken English and many strange and uncouth exclamations which Buck
could not understand.

"Sacredam!" he cried, when his eyes lit upon Buck. "Dat one dam bully
dog! Eh? How moch?"

"Three hundred, and a present at that," was the prompt reply of the man
in the red sweater. "And seem' it's government money, you ain't got no
kick coming, eh, Perrault?"


