I TELL this for a fact. It happened in the bull-ring at Quito. I sat
in the box with John Harned, and with Maria Valenzuela, and with Luis
Cervallos. I saw it happen. I saw it all from first to last. I was on
the steamer Ecuadore from Panama to Guayaquil. Maria Valenzuela is
my cousin. I have known her always. She is very beautiful. I am a
Spaniard--an Ecuadoriano, true, but I am descended from Pedro Patino,
who was one of Pizarro's captains. They were brave men. They were
heroes. Did not Pizarro lead three hundred and fifty Spanish cavaliers
and four thousand Indians into the far Cordilleras in search of
treasure? And did not all the four thousand Indians and three hundred
of the brave cavaliers die on that vain quest? But Pedro Patino did
not die. He it was that lived to found the family of the Patino. I am
Ecuadoriano, true, but I am Spanish. I am Manuel de Jesus Patino. I own
many haciendas, and ten thousand Indians are my slaves, though the law
says they are free men who work by freedom of contract. The law is a
funny thing. We Ecuadorianos laugh at it. It is our law. We make it for
ourselves. I am Manuel de Jesus Patino. Remember that name. It will be
written some day in history. There are revolutions in Ecuador. We call
them elections. It is a good joke is it not?--what you call a pun?

John Harned was an American. I met him first at the Tivoli hotel in
Panama. He had much money--this I have heard. He was going to Lima,
but he met Maria Valenzuela in the Tivoli hotel. Maria Valenzuela is
my cousin, and she is beautiful. It is true, she is the most beautiful
woman in Ecuador. But also is she most beautiful in every country--in
Paris, in Madrid, in New York, in Vienna. Always do all men look at her,
and John Harned looked long at her at Panama. He loved her, that I know
for a fact. She was Ecuadoriano, true--but she was of all countries; she
was of all the world. She spoke many languages. She sang--ah! like an
artiste. Her smile--wonderful, divine. Her eyes--ah! have I not seen
men look in her eyes? They were what you English call amazing. They were
promises of paradise. Men drowned themselves in her eyes.

Maria Valenzuela was rich--richer than I, who am accounted very rich in
Ecuador. But John Harned did not care for her money. He had a heart--a
funny heart. He was a fool. He did not go to Lima. He left the steamer
at Guayaquil and followed her to Quito. She was coming home from Europe
and other places. I do not see what she found in him, but she liked him.
This I know for a fact, else he would not have followed her to Quito.
She asked him to come. Well do I remember the occasion. She said:

"Come to Quito and I will show you the bullfight--brave, clever,
magnificent!"

But he said: "I go to Lima, not Quito. Such is my passage engaged on the
steamer."

"You travel for pleasure--no?" said Maria Valenzuela; and she looked at
him as only Maria Valenzuela could look, her eyes warm with the promise.

And he came. No; he did not come for the bull-fight. He came because of
what he had seen in her eyes. Women like Maria Valenzuela are born once
in a hundred years. They are of no country and no time. They are what
you call goddesses. Men fall down at their feet. They play with men and
run them through their pretty fingers like sand. Cleopatra was such a
woman they say; and so was Circe. She turned men into swine. Ha! ha! It
is true--no?

It all came about because Maria Valenzuela said:

"You English people are--what shall I say?--savage--no? You prize-fight.
Two men each hit the other with their fists till their eyes are blinded
and their noses are broken. Hideous! And the other men who look on cry
out loudly and are made glad. It is barbarous--no?"

"But they are men," said John Harned; "and they prize-fight out of
desire. No one makes them prize-fight. They do it because they desire it
more than anything else in the world."

Maria Valenzuela--there was scorn in her smile as she said: "They kill
each other often--is it not so? I have read it in the papers."

"But the bull," said John Harned.

"The bull is killed many times in the bull-fight, and the bull does not
come into the the ring out of desire. It is not fair to the bull. He
is compelled to fight. But the man in the prize-fight--no; he is not
compelled."

"He is the more brute therefore," said Maria Valenzuela.

"He is savage. He is primitive. He is animal. He strikes with his paws
like a bear from a cave, and he is ferocious. But the bull-fight--ah!
You have not seen the bullfight--no? The toreador is clever. He must
have skill. He is modern. He is romantic. He is only a man, soft and
tender, and he faces the wild bull in conflict. And he kills with a
sword, a slender sword, with one thrust, so, to the heart of the great
beast. It is delicious. It makes the heart beat to behold--the small
man, the great beast, the wide level sand, the thousands that look on
without breath; the great beast rushes to the attack, the small man
stands like a statue; he does not move, he is unafraid, and in his hand
is the slender sword flashing like silver in the sun; nearer and nearer
rushes the great beast with its sharp horns, the man does not move, and
then--so--the sword flashes, the thrust is made, to the heart, to the
hilt, the bull falls to the sand and is dead, and the man is unhurt. It
is brave. It is magnificent! Ah!--I could love the toreador. But the
man of the prize-fight--he is the brute, the human beast, the savage
primitive, the maniac that receives many blows in his stupid face and
rejoices. Come to Quito and I will show you the brave sport of men, the
toreador and the bull."

But John Harned did not go to Quito for the bull-fight. He went because
of Maria Valenzuela. He was a large man, more broad of shoulder than
we Ecuadorianos, more tall, more heavy of limb and bone. True, he was
larger of his own race. His eyes were blue, though I have seen them
gray, and, sometimes, like cold steel. His features were large, too--not
delicate like ours, and his jaw was very strong to look at. Also, his
face was smooth-shaven like a priest's. Why should a man feel shame for
the hair on his face? Did not God put it there? Yes, I believe in God--I
am not a pagan like many of you English. God is good. He made me an
Ecuadoriano with ten thousand slaves. And when I die I shall go to God.
Yes, the priests are right.

But John Harned. He was a quiet man. He talked always in a low voice,
and he never moved his hands when he talked. One would have thought his
heart was a piece of ice; yet did he have a streak of warm in his blood,
for he followed Maria Valenzuela to Quito. Also, and for all that he
talked low without moving his hands, he was an animal, as you shall
see--the beast primitive, the stupid, ferocious savage of the long ago
that dressed in wild skins and lived in the caves along with the bears
and wolves.


