Thenceforth, and until Jerry himself violated one of the greatest of
taboos, he had a happy time in Agno's gloomy grass house.  For Bashti,
unlike most chiefs, ruled his devil devil doctors with an iron hand.
Other chiefs, even Nau-hau of Langa-Langa, were ruled by their devil
devil doctors.  For that matter, the population of Somo believed that
Bashti was so ruled.  But the Somo folk did not know what went on behind
the scenes, when Bashti, a sheer infidel, talked alone now with one
doctor and now with another.

In these private talks he demonstrated that he knew their game as well as
they did, and that he was no slave to the dark superstitions and gross
impostures with which they kept the people in submission.  Also, he
exposited the theory, as ancient as priests and rulers, that priests and
rulers must work together in the orderly governance of the people.  He
was content that the people should believe that the gods, and the priests
who were the mouth-pieces of the gods, had the last word, but he would
have the priests know that in private the last word was his.  Little as
they believed in their trickery, he told them, he believed less.

He knew taboo, and the truth behind taboo.  He explained his personal
taboos, and how they came to be.  Never must he eat clam-meat, he told
Agno.  It was so selected by himself because he did not like clam-meat.
It was old Nino, high priest before Agno, with an ear open to the voice
of the shark-god, who had so laid the taboo.  But, he, Bashti, had
privily commanded Nino to lay the taboo against clam-meat upon him,
because he, Bashti, did not like clam-meat and had never liked clam-meat.

Still further, since he had lived longer than the oldest priest of them,
his had been the appointing of every one of them.  He knew them, had made
them, had placed them, and they lived by his pleasure.  And they would
continue to take program from him, as they had always taken it, or else
they would swiftly and suddenly pass.  He had but to remind them of the
passing of Kori, the devil devil doctor who had believed himself stronger
than his chief, and who, for his mistake, had screamed in pain for a week
ere what composed him had ceased to scream and for ever ceased to scream.

* * * * *

In Agno's large grass house was little light and much mystery.  There was
no mystery there for Jerry, who merely knew things, or did not know
things, and who never bothered about what he did not know.  Dried heads
and other cured and mouldy portions of human carcasses impressed him no
more than the dried alligators and dried fish that contributed to the
festooning of Agno's dark abode.

Jerry found himself well cared for.  No children nor wives cluttered the
devil devil doctor's house.  Several old women, a fly-flapping girl of
eleven, and two young men who had graduated from the canoe house of the
youths and who were studying priestcraft under the master, composed the
household and waited upon Jerry.  Food of the choicest was his.  After
Agno had eaten first-cut of pig, Jerry was served second.  Even the two
acolytes and the fly-flapping maid ate after him, leaving the debris for
the several old women.  And, unlike the mere bush dogs, who stole shelter
from the rain under overhanging eaves, Jerry was given a dry place under
the roof where the heads of bushmen and of forgotten sandalwood traders
hung down from above in the midst of a dusty confusion of dried viscera
of sharks, crocodile skulls, and skeletons of Solomons rats that measured
two-thirds of a yard in length from bone-tip of nose to bone-tip of tail.

A number of times, all freedom being his, Jerry stole away across the
village to the house of Lumai.  But never did he find Lamai, who, since
Skipper, was the only human he had met that had placed a bid to his
heart.  Jerry never appeared openly, but from the thick fern of the
brookside observed the house and scented out its occupants.  No scent of
Lamai did he ever obtain, and, after a time, he gave up his vain visits
and accepted the devil devil doctor's house as his home and the devil
devil doctor as his master.

But he bore no love for this master.  Agno, who had ruled by fear so long
in his house of mystery, did not know love.  Nor was affection any part
of him, nor was geniality.  He had no sense of humour, and was as
frostily cruel as an icicle.  Next to Bashti he stood in power, and all
his days had been embittered in that he was not first in power.  He had
no softness for Jerry.  Because he feared Bashti he feared to harm Jerry.

The months passed, and Jerry got his firm, massive second teeth and
increased in weight and size.  He came as near to being spoiled as is
possible for a dog.  Himself taboo, he quickly learned to lord it over
the Somo folk and to have his way and will in all matters.  No one dared
to dispute with him with stick or stone.  Agno hated him--he knew that;
but also he gleaned the knowledge that Agno feared him and would not dare
to hurt him.  But Agno was a chill-blooded philosopher and bided his
time, being different from Jerry in that he possessed human prevision and
could adjust his actions to remote ends.

From the edge of the lagoon, into the waters of which, remembering the
crocodile taboo he had learned on Meringe, he never ventured, Jerry
ranged to the outlying bush villages of Bashti's domain.  All made way
for him.  All fed him when he desired food.  For the taboo was upon him,
and he might unchidden invade their sleeping-mats or food calabashes.  He
might bully as he pleased, and be arrogant beyond decency, and there was
no one to say him nay.  Even had Bashti's word gone forth that if Jerry
were attacked by the full-grown bush dogs, it was the duty of the Somo
folk to take his part and kick and stone and beat the bush dogs.  And
thus his own four-legged cousins came painfully to know that he was
taboo.

And Jerry prospered.  Fat to stupidity he might well have become, had it
not been for his high-strung nerves and his insatiable, eager curiosity.
With the freedom of all Somo his, he was ever a-foot over it, learning
its metes and bounds and the ways of the wild creatures that inhabited
its swamps and forests and that did not acknowledge his taboo.

Many were his adventures.  He fought two battles with the wood-rats that
were almost of his size, and that, being mature and wild and cornered,
fought him as he had never been fought before.  The first he had killed,
unaware that it was an old and feeble rat.  The second, in prime of
vigour, had so punished him that he crawled back, weak and sick to the
devil devil doctor's house, where, for a week, under the dried emblems of
death, he licked his wounds and slowly came back to life and health.

He stole upon the dugong and joyed to stampede that silly timid creature
by sudden ferocious onslaughts which he knew himself to be all sound and
fury, but which tickled him and made him laugh with the consciousness of
playing a successful joke.  He chased the unmigratory tropi-ducks from
their shrewd-hidden nests, walked circumspectly among the crocodiles
hauled out of water for slumber, and crept under the jungle-roof and
spied upon the snow-white saucy cockatoos, the fierce ospreys, the heavy-
flighted buzzards, the lories and kingfishers, and the absurdly garrulous
little pygmy parrots.

Thrice, beyond the boundaries of Somo, he encountered the little black
bushmen who were more like ghosts than men, so noiseless and
unperceivable were they, and who, guarding the wild-pig runways of the
jungle, missed spearing him on the three memorable occasions.  As the
wood-rats had taught him discretion, so did these two-legged lurkers in
the jungle twilight.  He had not fought with them, although they tried to
spear him.  He quickly came to know that these were other folk than Somo
folk, that his taboo did not extend to them, and that, even of a sort,
they were two-legged gods who carried flying death in their hands that
reached farther than their hands and bridged distance.

As he ran the jungle, so Jerry ran the village.  No place was sacred to
him.  In the devil devil houses, where, before the face of mystery men
and women crawled in fear and trembling, he walked stiff-legged and
bristling; for fresh heads were suspended there--heads his eyes and keen
nostrils identified as those of once living blacks he had known on board
the _Arangi_.  In the biggest devil devil house he encountered the head
of Borckman, and snarled at it, without receiving response, in
recollection of the fight he had fought with the schnapps-addled mate on
the deck of the _Arangi_.

Once, however, in Bashti's house, he chanced upon all that remained on
earth of Skipper.  Bashti had lived very long, had lived most wisely and
thought much, and was thoroughly aware that, having lived far beyond the
span of man his own span was very short.  And he was curious about it
all--the meaning and purpose of life.  He loved the world and life, into
which he had been fortunately born, both as to constitution and to place,
which latter, for him, had been the high place over hie priests and
people.  He was not afraid to die, but he wondered if he might live
again.  He discounted the silly views of the tricky priests, and he was
very much alone in the chaos of the confusing problem.

For he had lived so long, and so luckily, that he had watched the waning
to extinction of all the vigorous appetites and desires.  He had known
wives and children, and the keen-edge of youthful hunger.  He had seen
his children grow to manhood and womanhood and become fathers and
grandfathers, mothers and grandmothers.  But having known woman, and
love, and fatherhood, and the belly-delights of eating, he had passed on
beyond.  Food?  Scarcely did he know its meaning, so little did he eat.
Hunger, that bit him like a spur when he was young and lusty, had long
since ceased to stir and prod him.  He ate out of a sense of necessity
and duty, and cared little for what he ate, save for one thing: the eggs
of the megapodes that were, in season, laid in his private, personal,
strictly tabooed megapode laying-yard.  Here was left to him his last
lingering flesh thrill.  As for the rest, he lived in his intellect,
ruling his people, seeking out data from which to induce laws that would
make his people stronger and rivet his people's clinch upon life.

But he realized clearly the difference between that abstract thing, the
tribe, and that most concrete of things, the individual.  The tribe
persisted.  Its members passed.  The tribe was a memory of the history
and habits of all previous members, which the living members carried on
until they passed and became history and memory in the intangible sum
that was the tribe.  He, as a member, soon or late, and late was very
near, must pass.  But pass to what?  There was the rub.  And so it was,
on occasion, that he ordered all forth from his big grass house, and,
alone with his problem, lowered from the roof-beams the matting-wrapped
parcels of heads of men he had once seen live and who had passed into the
mysterious nothingness of death.


