If ever a creature was the enemy of its kind, White Fang was that
creature.  He asked no quarter, gave none.  He was continually marred and
scarred by the teeth of the pack, and as continually he left his own
marks upon the pack.  Unlike most leaders, who, when camp was made and
the dogs were unhitched, huddled near to the gods for protection, White
Fang disdained such protection.  He walked boldly about the camp,
inflicting punishment in the night for what he had suffered in the day.
In the time before he was made leader of the team, the pack had learned
to get out of his way.  But now it was different.  Excited by the day-
long pursuit of him, swayed subconsciously by the insistent iteration on
their brains of the sight of him fleeing away, mastered by the feeling of
mastery enjoyed all day, the dogs could not bring themselves to give way
to him.  When he appeared amongst them, there was always a squabble.  His
progress was marked by snarl and snap and growl.  The very atmosphere he
breathed was surcharged with hatred and malice, and this but served to
increase the hatred and malice within him.

When Mit-sah cried out his command for the team to stop, White Fang
obeyed.  At first this caused trouble for the other dogs.  All of them
would spring upon the hated leader only to find the tables turned.  Behind
him would be Mit-sah, the great whip singing in his hand.  So the dogs
came to understand that when the team stopped by order, White Fang was to
be let alone.  But when White Fang stopped without orders, then it was
allowed them to spring upon him and destroy him if they could.  After
several experiences, White Fang never stopped without orders.  He learned
quickly.  It was in the nature of things, that he must learn quickly if
he were to survive the unusually severe conditions under which life was
vouchsafed him.

But the dogs could never learn the lesson to leave him alone in camp.
Each day, pursuing him and crying defiance at him, the lesson of the
previous night was erased, and that night would have to be learned over
again, to be as immediately forgotten.  Besides, there was a greater
consistence in their dislike of him.  They sensed between themselves and
him a difference of kind--cause sufficient in itself for hostility.  Like
him, they were domesticated wolves.  But they had been domesticated for
generations.  Much of the Wild had been lost, so that to them the Wild
was the unknown, the terrible, the ever-menacing and ever warring.  But
to him, in appearance and action and impulse, still clung the Wild.  He
symbolised it, was its personification: so that when they showed their
teeth to him they were defending themselves against the powers of
destruction that lurked in the shadows of the forest and in the dark
beyond the camp-fire.

But there was one lesson the dogs did learn, and that was to keep
together.  White Fang was too terrible for any of them to face single-
handed.  They met him with the mass-formation, otherwise he would have
killed them, one by one, in a night.  As it was, he never had a chance to
kill them.  He might roll a dog off its feet, but the pack would be upon
him before he could follow up and deliver the deadly throat-stroke.  At
the first hint of conflict, the whole team drew together and faced him.
The dogs had quarrels among themselves, but these were forgotten when
trouble was brewing with White Fang.

On the other hand, try as they would, they could not kill White Fang.  He
was too quick for them, too formidable, too wise.  He avoided tight
places and always backed out of it when they bade fair to surround him.
While, as for getting him off his feet, there was no dog among them
capable of doing the trick.  His feet clung to the earth with the same
tenacity that he clung to life.  For that matter, life and footing were
synonymous in this unending warfare with the pack, and none knew it
better than White Fang.

So he became the enemy of his kind, domesticated wolves that they were,
softened by the fires of man, weakened in the sheltering shadow of man's
strength.  White Fang was bitter and implacable.  The clay of him was so
moulded.  He declared a vendetta against all dogs.  And so terribly did
he live this vendetta that Grey Beaver, fierce savage himself, could not
but marvel at White Fang's ferocity.  Never, he swore, had there been the
like of this animal; and the Indians in strange villages swore likewise
when they considered the tale of his killings amongst their dogs.

When White Fang was nearly five years old, Grey Beaver took him on
another great journey, and long remembered was the havoc he worked
amongst the dogs of the many villages along the Mackenzie, across the
Rockies, and down the Porcupine to the Yukon.  He revelled in the
vengeance he wreaked upon his kind.  They were ordinary, unsuspecting
dogs.  They were not prepared for his swiftness and directness, for his
attack without warning.  They did not know him for what he was, a
lightning-flash of slaughter.  They bristled up to him, stiff-legged and
challenging, while he, wasting no time on elaborate preliminaries,
snapping into action like a steel spring, was at their throats and
destroying them before they knew what was happening and while they were
yet in the throes of surprise.

He became an adept at fighting.  He economised.  He never wasted his
strength, never tussled.  He was in too quickly for that, and, if he
missed, was out again too quickly.  The dislike of the wolf for close
quarters was his to an unusual degree.  He could not endure a prolonged
contact with another body.  It smacked of danger.  It made him frantic.
He must be away, free, on his own legs, touching no living thing.  It was
the Wild still clinging to him, asserting itself through him.  This
feeling had been accentuated by the Ishmaelite life he had led from his
puppyhood.  Danger lurked in contacts.  It was the trap, ever the trap,
the fear of it lurking deep in the life of him, woven into the fibre of
him.

In consequence, the strange dogs he encountered had no chance against
him.  He eluded their fangs.  He got them, or got away, himself untouched
in either event.  In the natural course of things there were exceptions
to this.  There were times when several dogs, pitching on to him,
punished him before he could get away; and there were times when a single
dog scored deeply on him.  But these were accidents.  In the main, so
efficient a fighter had he become, he went his way unscathed.


