But Watson was soon to learn. Patsy Horan and two of his satellites
testified to a most colossal aggregation of perjuries. Watson could not
have believed it possible without having experienced it. They denied
the existence of the other four men. And of the two that testified, one
claimed to have been in the kitchen, a witness to Watson's unprovoked
assault on Patsy, while the other, remaining in the bar, had witnessed
Watson's second and third rushes into the place as he attempted to
annihilate the unoffending Patsy. The vile language ascribed to Watson
was so voluminously and unspeakably vile, that he felt they were
injuring their own case. It was so impossible that he should utter such
things. But when they described the brutal blows he had rained on poor
Patsy's face, and the chair he demolished when he vainly attempted to
kick Patsy, Watson waxed secretly hilarious and at the same time sad.
The trial was a farce, but such lowness of life was depressing to
contemplate when he considered the long upward climb humanity must make.

Watson could not recognize himself, nor could his worst enemy have
recognized him, in the swashbuckling, rough-housing picture that was
painted of him. But, as in all cases of complicated perjury, rifts and
contradictions in the various stories appeared. The Judge somehow failed
to notice them, while the Prosecuting Attorney and Patsy's attorney
shied off from them gracefully. Watson had not bothered to get a lawyer
for himself, and he was now glad that he had not.

Still, he retained a semblance of faith in Judge Witberg when he went
himself on the stand and started to tell his story.

"I was strolling casually along the street, your Honor," Watson began,
but was interrupted by the Judge.

"We are not here to consider your previous actions," bellowed Judge
Witberg. "Who struck the first blow?"

"Your Honor," Watson pleaded, "I have no witnesses of the actual fray,
and the truth of my story can only be brought out by telling the story
fully--"

Again he was interrupted.

"We do not care to publish any magazines here," Judge Witberg roared,
looking at him so fiercely and malevolently that Watson could scarcely
bring himself to believe that this was same man he had studied a few
minutes previously.

"Who struck the first blow?" Patsy's attorney asked.

The Prosecuting Attorney interposed, demanding to know which of the two
cases lumped together was, and by what right Patsy's lawyer, at that
stage of the proceedings, should take the witness. Patsy's attorney
fought back. Judge Witberg interfered, professing no knowledge of any
two cases being lumped together. All this had to be explained. Battle
royal raged, terminating in both attorneys apologizing to the Court and
to each other. And so it went, and to Watson it had the seeming of a
group of pickpockets ruffling and bustling an honest man as they took
his purse. The machine was working, that was all.

"Why did you enter this place of unsavory reputations?" was asked him.

"It has been my custom for many years, as a student of economics and
sociology, to acquaint myself--"

But this was as far as Watson got.

"We want none of your ologies here," snarled Judge Witberg. "It is a
plain question. Answer it plainly. Is it true or not true that you were
drunk? That is the gist of the question."

When Watson attempted to tell how Patsy had injured his face in his
attempts to bat with his head, Watson was openly scouted and flouted,
and Judge Witberg again took him in hand.

"Are you aware of the solemnity of the oath you took to testify to
nothing but the truth on this witness stand?" the Judge demanded. "This
is a fairy story you are telling. It is not reasonable that a man would
so injure himself, and continue to injure himself, by striking the soft
and sensitive parts of his face against your head. You are a sensible
man. It is unreasonable, is it not?"

"Men are unreasonable when they are angry," Watson answered meekly.

Then it was that Judge Witberg was deeply outraged and righteously
wrathful.

"What right have you to say that?" he cried. "It is gratuitous. It has
no bearing on the case. You are here as a witness, sir, of events that
have transpired. The Court does not wish to hear any expressions of
opinion from you at all."

"I but answered your question, your Honor," Watson protested humbly.

"You did nothing of the sort," was the next blast. "And let me warn you,
sir, let me warn you, that you are laying yourself liable to contempt by
such insolence. And I will have you know that we know how to observe the
law and the rules of courtesy down here in this little courtroom. I am
ashamed of you."

