Henry leaped out of the blankets and to the dogs.  He counted them with
care, and then joined his partner in cursing the power of the Wild that
had robbed them of another dog.

"Frog was the strongest dog of the bunch," Bill pronounced finally.

"An' he was no fool dog neither," Henry added.

And so was recorded the second epitaph in two days.

A gloomy breakfast was eaten, and the four remaining dogs were harnessed
to the sled.  The day was a repetition of the days that had gone before.
The men toiled without speech across the face of the frozen world.  The
silence was unbroken save by the cries of their pursuers, that, unseen,
hung upon their rear.  With the coming of night in the mid-afternoon, the
cries sounded closer as the pursuers drew in according to their custom;
and the dogs grew excited and frightened, and were guilty of panics that
tangled the traces and further depressed the two men.

"There, that'll fix you fool critters," Bill said with satisfaction that
night, standing erect at completion of his task.

Henry left the cooking to come and see.  Not only had his partner tied
the dogs up, but he had tied them, after the Indian fashion, with sticks.
About the neck of each dog he had fastened a leather thong.  To this, and
so close to the neck that the dog could not get his teeth to it, he had
tied a stout stick four or five feet in length.  The other end of the
stick, in turn, was made fast to a stake in the ground by means of a
leather thong.  The dog was unable to gnaw through the leather at his own
end of the stick.  The stick prevented him from getting at the leather
that fastened the other end.

Henry nodded his head approvingly.

"It's the only contraption that'll ever hold One Ear," he said.  "He can
gnaw through leather as clean as a knife an' jes' about half as quick.
They all'll be here in the mornin' hunkydory."

"You jes' bet they will," Bill affirmed.  "If one of em' turns up
missin', I'll go without my coffee."

"They jes' know we ain't loaded to kill," Henry remarked at bed-time,
indicating the gleaming circle that hemmed them in.  "If we could put a
couple of shots into 'em, they'd be more respectful.  They come closer
every night.  Get the firelight out of your eyes an' look hard--there!
Did you see that one?"

For some time the two men amused themselves with watching the movement of
vague forms on the edge of the firelight.  By looking closely and
steadily at where a pair of eyes burned in the darkness, the form of the
animal would slowly take shape.  They could even see these forms move at
times.

A sound among the dogs attracted the men's attention.  One Ear was
uttering quick, eager whines, lunging at the length of his stick toward
the darkness, and desisting now and again in order to make frantic
attacks on the stick with his teeth.

"Look at that, Bill," Henry whispered.

Full into the firelight, with a stealthy, sidelong movement, glided a
doglike animal.  It moved with commingled mistrust and daring, cautiously
observing the men, its attention fixed on the dogs.  One Ear strained the
full length of the stick toward the intruder and whined with eagerness.

"That fool One Ear don't seem scairt much," Bill said in a low tone.

"It's a she-wolf," Henry whispered back, "an' that accounts for Fatty an'
Frog.  She's the decoy for the pack.  She draws out the dog an' then all
the rest pitches in an' eats 'm up."

The fire crackled.  A log fell apart with a loud spluttering noise.  At
the sound of it the strange animal leaped back into the darkness.

"Henry, I'm a-thinkin'," Bill announced.

"Thinkin' what?"

"I'm a-thinkin' that was the one I lambasted with the club."

"Ain't the slightest doubt in the world," was Henry's response.

"An' right here I want to remark," Bill went on, "that that animal's
familyarity with campfires is suspicious an' immoral."

"It knows for certain more'n a self-respectin' wolf ought to know," Henry
agreed.  "A wolf that knows enough to come in with the dogs at feedin'
time has had experiences."

"Ol' Villan had a dog once that run away with the wolves," Bill cogitates
aloud.  "I ought to know.  I shot it out of the pack in a moose pasture
over 'on Little Stick.  An' Ol' Villan cried like a baby.  Hadn't seen it
for three years, he said.  Ben with the wolves all that time."

"I reckon you've called the turn, Bill.  That wolf's a dog, an' it's
eaten fish many's the time from the hand of man."

"An if I get a chance at it, that wolf that's a dog'll be jes' meat,"
Bill declared.  "We can't afford to lose no more animals."


