Back on board, Van Horn immediately hove short, hoisted sail, broke out
the anchor, and filled away for the ten-mile beat up the lagoon to
windward that would fetch Somo.  On the way, he stopped at Binu to greet
Chief Johnny and land a few Binu returns.  Then it was on to Somo, and to
the end of voyaging for ever of the _Arangi_ and of many that were aboard
of her.

Quite the opposite to his treatment at Langa-Langa was that accorded Van
Horn at Somo.  Once the return boys were put ashore, and this was
accomplished no later than three-thirty in the afternoon, he invited
Chief Bashti on board.  And Chief Bashti came, very nimble and active
despite his great age, and very good-natured--so good-natured, in fact,
that he insisted on bringing three of his elderly wives on board with
him.  This was unprecedented.  Never had he permitted any of his wives to
appear before a white man, and Van Horn felt so honoured that he
presented each of them with a gay clay pipe and a dozen sticks of
tobacco.

Late as the afternoon was, trade was brisk, and Bashti, who had taken the
lion's share of the wages due to the fathers of two boys who had died,
bought liberally of the _Arangi's_ stock.  When Bashti promised plenty of
fresh recruits, Van Horn, used to the changeableness of the savage mind,
urged signing them up right away.  Bashti demurred, and suggested next
day.  Van Horn insisted that there was no time like the present, and so
well did he insist that the old chief sent a canoe ashore to round up the
boys who had been selected to go away to the plantations.

"Now, what do you think?" Van Horn asked of Borckman, whose eyes were
remarkably fishy.  "I never saw the old rascal so friendly.  Has he got
something up his sleeve?"

The mate stared at the many canoes alongside, noted the numbers of women
in them, and shook his head.

"When they're starting anything they always send the Marys into the
bush," he said.

"You never can tell about these niggers," the captain grumbled.  "They
may be short on imagination, but once in a while they do figure out
something new.  Now Bashti's the smartest old nigger I've ever seen.
What's to prevent his figuring out that very bet and playing it in
reverse?  Just because they've never had their women around when trouble
was on the carpet is no reason that they will always keep that practice."

"Not even Bashti's got the savvee to pull a trick like that," Borckman
objected.  "He's just feeling good and liberal.  Why, he's bought forty
pounds of goods from you already.  That's why he wants to sign on a new
batch of boys with us, and I'll bet he's hoping half of them die so's he
can have the spending of their wages."

All of which was most reasonable.  Nevertheless, Van Horn shook his head.

"All the same keep your eyes sharp on everything," he cautioned.  "And
remember, the two of us mustn't ever be below at the same time.  And no
more schnapps, mind, until we're clear of the whole kit and caboodle."

Bashti was incredibly lean and prodigiously old.  He did not know how old
he was himself, although he did know that no person in his tribe had been
alive when he was a young boy in the village.  He remembered the days
when some of the old men, still alive, had been born; and, unlike him,
they were now decrepit, shaken with palsy, blear-eyed, toothless of
mouth, deaf of ear, or paralysed.  All his own faculties remained
unimpaired.  He even boasted a dozen worn fangs of teeth, gum-level, on
which he could still chew.  Although he no longer had the physical
endurance of youth, his thinking was as original and clear as it had
always been.  It was due to his thinking that he found his tribe stronger
than when he had first come to rule it.  In his small way he had been a
Melanesian Napoleon.  As a warrior, the play of his mind had enabled him
to beat back the bushmen's boundaries.  The scars on his withered body
attested that he had fought to the fore.  As a Law-giver, he had
encouraged and achieved strength and efficiency within his tribe.  As a
statesman, he had always kept one thought ahead of the thoughts of the
neighbouring chiefs in the making of treaties and the granting of
concessions.

And with his mind, still keenly alive, he had but just evolved a scheme
whereby he might outwit Van Horn and get the better of the vast British
Empire about which he guessed little and know less.

For Somo had a history.  It was that queer anomaly, a salt-water tribe
that lived on the lagoon mainland where only bushmen were supposed to
live.  Far back into the darkness of time, the folk-lore of Somo cast a
glimmering light.  On a day, so far back that there was no way of
estimating its distance, one, Somo, son of Loti, who was the chief of the
island fortress of Umbo, had quarrelled with his father and fled from his
wrath along with a dozen canoe-loads of young men.  For two monsoons they
had engaged in an odyssey.  It was in the myth that they circumnavigated
Malaita twice, and forayed as far as Ugi and San Cristobal across the
wide seas.

Women they had inevitably stolen after successful combats, and, in the
end, being burdened with women and progeny, Somo had descended upon the
mainland shore, driven the bushmen back, and established the salt-water
fortress of Somo.  Built it was, on its sea-front, like any island
fortress, with walled coral-rock to oppose the sea and chance marauders
from the sea, and with launching ways through the walls for the long
canoes.  To the rear, where it encroached on the jungle, it was like any
scattered bush village.  But Somo, the wide-seeing father of the new
tribe, had established his boundaries far up in the bush on the shoulders
of the lesser mountains, and on each shoulder had planted a village.  Only
the greatly daring that fled to him had Somo permitted to join the new
tribe.  The weaklings and cowards they had promptly eaten, and the
unbelievable tale of their many heads adorning the canoe-houses was part
of the myth.


