"Come, you'd better let philosophy alone," he said.  "The chief
problem of the philosophy of all ages consists just in finding
the indispensable connection which exists between individual and
social interests.  But that's not to the point; what is to the
point is a correction I must make in your comparison.  The
birches are not simply stuck in, but some are sown and some are
planted, and one must deal carefully with them.  It's only those
peoples that have an intuitive sense of what's of importance and
significance in their institutions, and know how to value them,
that have a future before them--it's only those peoples that one
can truly call historical."

And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the regions of
philosophical history where Konstantin Levin could not follow
him, and showed him all the incorrectness of his view.

"As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that's simply
our Russian sloth and old serf-owner's ways, and I'm convinced
that in you it's a temporary error and will pass."

Konstantin was silent.  He felt himself vanquished on all sides,
but he felt at the same time that what he wanted to say was
unintelligible to his brother.  Only he could not make up his
mind whether it was unintelligible because he was not capable of
expressing his meaning clearly, or because his brother would not
or could not understand him.  But he did not pursue the
speculation, and without replying, he fell to musing on a quite
different and personal matter.

Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the horse, and
they drove off.



The personal matter that absorbed Levin during his conversation
with his brother was this.  Once in a previous year he had gone
to look at the mowing, and being made very angry by the bailiff
he had recourse to his favorite means for regaining his temper,--
he took a scythe from a peasant and began mowing.

He liked the work so much that he had several times tried his
hand at mowing since.  He had cut the whole of the meadow in
front of his house, and this year ever since the early spring he
had cherished a plan for mowing for whole days together with the
peasants.  Ever since his brother's arrival, he had been in doubt
whether to mow or not.  He was loath to leave his brother alone
all day long, and he was afraid his brother would laugh at him
about it.  But as he drove into the meadow, and recalled the
sensations of mowing, he came near deciding that he would go
mowing.  After the irritating discussion with his brother, he
pondered over this intention again.

"I must have physical exercise, or my temper'll certainly be
ruined," he thought, and he determined he would go mowing,
however awkward he might feel about it with his brother or the
peasants.

Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his counting house, gave
directions as to the work to be done, and sent about the village
to summon the mowers for the morrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov
meadow, the largest and best of his grass lands.

"And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for him to set it, and bring
it round tomorrow.  I shall maybe do some mowing myself too," he
said, trying not to be embarrassed.

The bailiff smiled and said: "Yes, sir."

At tea the same evening Levin said to his brother:

"I fancy the fine weather will last.  Tomorrow I shall start
mowing."


