Ergushov roared with laughter and nudged Nazarka. 'You'd better sing.
And I'll begin too. I'm clever, I tell you.'

'Are you asleep, fair ones?' said Nazarka. 'We've come from the cordon
to drink your health. We've already drunk Lukashka's health.'

Lukashka, when he reached the group, slowly raised his cap and stopped
in front of the girls. His broad cheekbones and neck were red. He stood
and spoke softly and sedately, but in his tranquillity and sedateness
there was more of animation and strength than in all Nazarka's
loquacity and bustle. He reminded one of a playful colt that with a
snort and a flourish of its tail suddenly stops short and stands as
though nailed to the ground with all four feet. Lukashka stood quietly
in front of the girls, his eyes laughed, and he spoke but little as he
glanced now at his drunken companions and now at the girls. When
Maryanka joined the group he raised his cap with a firm deliberate
movement, moved out of her way and then stepped in front of her with
one foot a little forward and with his thumbs in his belt, fingering
his dagger. Maryanka answered his greeting with a leisurely bow of her
head, settled down on the earth-bank, and took some seeds out of the
bosom of her smock. Lukashka, keeping his eyes fixed on Maryanka,
slowly cracked seeds and spat out the shells. All were quiet when
Maryanka joined the group.

'Have you come for long?' asked a woman, breaking the silence.

'Till to-morrow morning,' quietly replied Lukashka.

'Well, God grant you get something good,' said the Cossack; 'I'm glad
of it, as I've just been saying.'

'And I say so too,' put in the tipsy Ergushov, laughing. 'What a lot of
visitors have come,' he added, pointing to a soldier who was passing
by. 'The soldiers' vodka is good--I like it.'

'They've sent three of the devils to us,' said one of the women.
'Grandad went to the village Elders, but they say nothing can be done.'

'Ah, ha! Have you met with trouble?' said Ergushov.

'I expect they have smoked you out with their tobacco?' asked another
woman. 'Smoke as much as you like in the yard, I say, but we won't
allow it inside the hut. Not if the Elder himself comes, I won't allow
it. Besides, they may rob you. He's not quartered any of them on
himself, no fear, that devil's son of an Elder.'

'You don't like it?' Ergushov began again.

'And I've also heard say that the girls will have to make the soldiers'
beds and offer them chikhir and honey,' said Nazarka, putting one foot
forward and tilting his cap like Lukashka.

Ergushov burst into a roar of laughter, and seizing the girl nearest to
him, he embraced her. 'I tell you true.'

'Now then, you black pitch!' squealed the girl, 'I'll tell your old
woman.'

'Tell her,' shouted he. 'That's quite right what Nazarka says; a
circular has been sent round. He can read, you know. Quite true!' And
he began embracing the next girl.

'What are you up to, you beast?' squealed the rosy, round-faced
Ustenka, laughing and lifting her arm to hit him.

The Cossack stepped aside and nearly fell.

'There, they say girls have no strength, and you nearly killed me.'

'Get away, you black pitch, what devil has brought you from the
cordon?' said Ustenka, and turning away from him she again burst out
laughing. 'You were asleep and missed the abrek, didn't you? Suppose he
had done for you it would have been all the better.'

'You'd have howled, I expect,' said Nazarka, laughing.

'Howled! A likely thing.'

'Just look, she doesn't care. She'd howl, Nazarka, eh? Would she?' said
Ergushov.

Lukishka all this time had stood silently looking at Maryanka. His gaze
evidently confused the girl.

'Well, Maryanka! I hear they've quartered one of the chiefs on you?' he
said, drawing nearer.

Maryanka, as was her wont, waited before she replied, and slowly
raising her eyes looked at the Cossack. Lukashka's eyes were laughing
as if something special, apart from what was said, was taking place
between himself and the girl.

'Yes, it's all right for them as they have two huts,' replied an old
woman on Maryanka's behalf, 'but at Fomushkin's now they also have one
of the chiefs quartered on them and they say one whole corner is packed
full with his things, and the family have no room left. Was such a
thing ever heard of as that they should turn a whole horde loose in the
village?' she said. 'And what the plague are they going to do here?'

'I've heard say they'll build a bridge across the Terek,' said one of
the girls.

'And I've been told that they will dig a pit to put the girls in
because they don't love the lads,' said Nazarka, approaching Ustenka;
and he again made a whimsical gesture which set everybody laughing, and
Ergushov, passing by Maryanka, who was next in turn, began to embrace
an old woman.

'Why don't you hug Maryanka? You should do it to each in turn,' said
Nazarka.

'No, my old one is sweeter,' shouted the Cossack, kissing the
struggling old woman.

