Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the state of
Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to the Emperor.

On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived in
Tilsit. Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whom he
was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for the stay at
Tilsit.

"I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon,
whom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.

"You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.

Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw that he was
being tested.

"I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon," he replied. The
general patted him on the shoulder, with a smile.

"You will go far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.

Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the two
Emperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, saw Napoleon
pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of the river, saw the
pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat in silence in a tavern
on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon's arrival, saw both Emperors
get into boats, and saw how Napoleon--reaching the raft first--stepped
quickly forward to meet Alexander and held out his hand to him, and how
they both retired into the pavilion. Since he had begun to move in the
highest circles Boris had made it his habit to watch attentively all
that went on around him and to note it down. At the time of the meeting
at Tilsit he asked the names of those who had come with Napoleon and
about the uniforms they wore, and listened attentively to words spoken
by important personages. At the moment the Emperors went into the
pavilion he looked at his watch, and did not forget to look at it
again when Alexander came out. The interview had lasted an hour and
fifty-three minutes. He noted this down that same evening, among other
facts he felt to be of historic importance. As the Emperor's suite was
a very small one, it was a matter of great importance, for a man who
valued his success in the service, to be at Tilsit on the occasion of
this interview between the two Emperors, and having succeeded in this,
Boris felt that henceforth his position was fully assured. He had not
only become known, but people had grown accustomed to him and accepted
him. Twice he had executed commissions to the Emperor himself, so
that the latter knew his face, and all those at court, far from
cold-shouldering him as at first when they considered him a newcomer,
would now have been surprised had he been absent.

Boris lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski.
Zhilinski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately
fond of the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, French
officers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining and
lunching with him and Boris.

On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinski arranged a
supper for his French friends. The guest of honor was an aide-de-camp of
Napoleon's, there were also several French officers of the Guard, and
a page of Napoleon's, a young lad of an old aristocratic French
family. That same day, Rostov, profiting by the darkness to avoid being
recognized in civilian dress, came to Tilsit and went to the lodging
occupied by Boris and Zhilinski.

Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was far
from having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon and the
French--who from being foes had suddenly become friends--that had taken
place at headquarters and in Boris. In the army, Bonaparte and the
French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger, contempt,
and fear. Only recently, talking with one of Platov's Cossack officers,
Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were taken prisoner he would be
treated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal. Quite lately, happening
to meet a wounded French colonel on the road, Rostov had maintained with
heat that peace was impossible between a legitimate sovereign and the
criminal Bonaparte. Rostov was therefore unpleasantly struck by the
presence of French officers in Boris' lodging, dressed in uniforms he
had been accustomed to see from quite a different point of view from
the outposts of the flank. As soon as he noticed a French officer, who
thrust his head out of the door, that warlike feeling of hostility which
he always experienced at the sight of the enemy suddenly seized him. He
stopped at the threshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived
there. Boris, hearing a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meet
him. An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his face
on first recognizing Rostov.

"Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however,
coming toward him with a smile. But Rostov had noticed his first
impulse.

"I've come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I have
business," he said coldly.


