'I told Ulitka the other day that I'd send a matchmaker to them,' said
the mother. 'She took my words well.'

Lukashka looked silently at his mother.

'But how about selling the wine, mother? I need a horse.'

'I'll cart it when I have time. I must get the barrels ready,' said the
mother, evidently not wishing her son to meddle in domestic matters.
'When you go out you'll find a bag in the passage. I borrowed from the
neighbours and got something for you to take back to the cordon; or
shall I put it in your saddle-bag?'

'All right,' answered Lukashka. 'And if Girey Khan should come across
the river send him to me at the cordon, for I shan't get leave again
for a long time now; I have some business with him.'

He began to get ready to start.

'I will send him on,' said the old woman. 'It seems you have been
spreeing at Yamka's all the time. I went out in the night to see the
cattle, and I think it was your voice I heard singing songs.'

Lukashka did not reply, but went out into the passage, threw the bags
over his shoulder, tucked up the skirts of his coat, took his musket,
and then stopped for a moment on the threshold.

'Good-bye, mother!' he said as he closed the gate behind him. 'Send me
a small barrel with Nazarka. I promised it to the lads, and he'll call
for it.'

'May Christ keep you, Lukashka. God be with you! I'll send you some,
some from the new barrel,' said the old woman, going to the fence: 'But
listen,' she added, leaning over the fence.

The Cossack stopped.

'You've been making merry here; well, that's all right. Why should not
a young man amuse himself? God has sent you luck and that's good. But
now look out and mind, my son. Don't you go and get into mischief.
Above all, satisfy your superiors: one has to! And I will sell the wine
and find money for a horse and will arrange a match with the girl for
you.'

'All right, all right!' answered her son, frowning.

His deaf sister shouted to attract his attention. She pointed to her
head and the palm of her hand, to indicate the shaved head of a
Chechen. Then she frowned, and pretending to aim with a gun, she
shrieked and began rapidly humming and shaking her head. This meant
that Lukashka should kill another Chechen.

Lukashka understood. He smiled, and shifting the gun at his back under
his cloak stepped lightly and rapidly, and soon disappeared in the
thick mist.

The old woman, having stood a little while at the gate, returned
silently to the hut and immediately began working.



