"You've been enjoying yourself," she began, trying to be calm and
spiteful.  But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of
reproach, of senseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing
her during that half hour which she had spent sitting motionless
at the window, burst from her.  It was only then, for the first
time, that he clearly understood what he had not understood when
he led her out of the church after the wedding.  He felt now that
he was not simply close to her, but that he did not know where he
ended and she began.  He felt this from the agonizing sensation
of division that he experienced at that instant.  He was offended
for the first instant, but the very same second he felt that he
could not be offended by her, that she was himself.  He felt for
the first moment as a man feels when, having suddenly received a
violent blow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager to
avenge himself, to look for his antagonist, and finds that it is
he himself who has accidentally struck himself, that there is no
one to be angry with, and that he must put up with and try to
soothe the pain.

Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this
first time he could not for a long while get over it.  His
natural feeling urged him to defend himself, to prove to her she
was wrong; but to prove her wrong would mean irritating her still
more and making the rupture greater that was the cause of all his
suffering.  One habitual feeling impelled him to get rid of the
blame and to pass it on to her.  Another feeling, even stronger,
impelled him as quickly as possible to smooth over the rupture
without letting it grow greater.  To remain under such undeserved
reproach was wretched, but to make her suffer by justifying
himself was worse still.  Like a man half-awake in an agony of
pain, he wanted to tear out, to fling away the aching place, and
coming to his senses, he felt that the aching place was himself.
He could do nothing but try to help the aching place to bear it,
and this he tried to do.

They made peace.  She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she
did not say so, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new,
redoubled happiness in their love.  But that did not prevent such
quarrels from happening again, and exceedingly often too, on the
most unexpected and trivial grounds.  These quarrels frequently
arose from the fact that they did not yet know what was of
importance to each other and that all this early period they were
both often in a bad temper.  When one was in a good temper, and
the other in a bad temper, the peace was not broken; but when
both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrels sprang up from such
incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could never remember
afterwards what they had quarreled about.  It is true that when
they were both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was
redoubled.  But still this first period of their married life was
a difficult time for them.

During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of
tension, as it were, a tugging in opposite directions of the
chain by which they were bound.  Altogether their honeymoon--that
is to say, the month after their wedding--from which from
tradition Levin expected so much, was not merely not a time of
sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as the bitterest
and most humiliating period in their lives.  They both alike
tried in later life to blot out from their memories all the
monstrous, shameful incidents of that morbid period, when both
were rarely in a normal frame of mind, both were rarely quite
themselves.

It was only in the third month of their married life, after their
return from Moscow, where they had been staying for a month, that
their life began to go more smoothly.


