Daddy Eroshka's hut was of a good size and not old, but the absence of
a woman was very noticeable in it. Contrary to the usual cleanliness of
the Cossacks, the whole of this hut was filthy and exceedingly untidy.
A blood-stained coat had been thrown on the table, half a dough-cake
lay beside a plucked and mangled crow with which to feed the hawk.
Sandals of raw hide, a gun, a dagger, a little bag, wet clothes, and
sundry rags lay scattered on the benches. In a corner stood a tub with
stinking water, in which another pair of sandals were being steeped,
and near by was a gun and a hunting-screen. On the floor a net had been
thrown down and several dead pheasants lay there, while a hen tied by
its leg was walking about near the table pecking among the dirt. In the
unheated oven stood a broken pot with some kind of milky liquid. On the
top of the oven a falcon was screeching and trying to break the cord by
which it was tied, and a moulting hawk sat quietly on the edge of the
oven, looking askance at the hen and occasionally bowing its head to
right and left. Daddy Eroshka himself, in his shirt, lay on his back on
a short bed rigged up between the wall and the oven, with his strong
legs raised and his feet on the oven. He was picking with his thick
fingers at the scratches left on his hands by the hawk, which he was
accustomed to carry without wearing gloves. The whole room, especially
near the old man, was filled with that strong but not unpleasant
mixture of smells that he always carried about with him.

'Uyde-ma, Daddy?' (Is Daddy in?) came through the window in a sharp
voice, which he at once recognized as Lukashka's.

'Uyde, Uyde, Uyde. I am in!' shouted the old man. 'Come in, neighbour
Mark, Luke Mark. Come to see Daddy? On your way to the cordon?'

At the sound of his master's shout the hawk flapped his wings and
pulled at his cord.

The old man was fond of Lukashka, who was the only man he excepted from
his general contempt for the younger generation of Cossacks. Besides
that, Lukashka and his mother, as near neighbours, often gave the old
man wine, clotted cream, and other home produce which Eroshka did not
possess. Daddy Eroshka, who all his life had allowed himself to get
carried away, always explained his infatuations from a practical point
of view. 'Well, why not?' he used to say to himself. 'I'll give them
some fresh meat, or a bird, and they won't forget Daddy: they'll
sometimes bring a cake or a piece of pie.'

'Good morning. Mark! I am glad to see you,' shouted the old man
cheerfully, and quickly putting down his bare feet he jumped off his
bed and walked a step or two along the creaking floor, looked down at
his out-turned toes, and suddenly, amused by the appearance of his
feet, smiled, stamped with his bare heel on the ground, stamped again,
and then performed a funny dance-step. 'That's clever, eh?' he asked,
his small eyes glistening. Lukashka smiled faintly. 'Going back to the
cordon?' asked the old man.

'I have brought the chikhir I promised you when we were at the cordon.'

'May Christ save you!' said the old man, and he took up the extremely
wide trousers that were lying on the floor, and his beshmet, put them
on, fastened a strap round his waist, poured some water from an
earthenware pot over his hands, wiped them on the old trousers,
smoothed his beard with a bit of comb, and stopped in front of
Lukashka. 'Ready,' he said.

Lukashka fetched a cup, wiped it and filled it with wine, and then
handed it to the old man.

'Your health! To the Father and the Son!' said the old man, accepting
the wine with solemnity. 'May you have what you desire, may you always
be a hero, and obtain a cross.'

Lukashka also drank a little after repeating a prayer, and then put the
wine on the table. The old man rose and brought out some dried fish
which he laid on the threshold, where he beat it with a stick to make
it tender; then, having put it with his horny hands on a blue plate
(his only one), he placed it on the table.


