And so she thought and thought again how she might kill her, for so
long as she was not the fairest in the whole land, envy let her have no
rest. And when she had at last thought of something to do, she painted
her face, and dressed herself like an old pedler-woman, and no one could
have known her. In this disguise she went over the seven mountains to the
seven dwarfs, and knocked at the door and cried, "Pretty things to sell,
very cheap, very cheap." Little Snow-white looked out of the window and
called out, "Good-day my good woman, what have you to sell?" "Good things,
pretty things," she answered; "stay-laces of all colours," and she pulled
out one which was woven of bright-coloured silk. "I may let the worthy
old woman in," thought Snow-white, and she unbolted the door and bought
the pretty laces. "Child," said the old woman, "what a fright you look;
come, I will lace you properly for once." Snow-white had no suspicion,
but stood before her, and let herself be laced with the new laces. But
the old woman laced so quickly and so tightly that Snow-white lost her
breath and fell down as if dead. "Now I am the most beautiful," said
the Queen to herself, and ran away.

Not long afterwards, in the evening, the seven dwarfs came home, but
how shocked they were when they saw their dear little Snow-white lying
on the ground, and that she neither stirred nor moved, and seemed to be
dead. They lifted her up, and, as they saw that she was laced too tightly,
they cut the laces; then she began to breathe a little, and after a while
came to life again. When the dwarfs heard what had happened they said,
"The old pedler-woman was no one else than the wicked Queen; take care
and let no one come in when we are not with you."

But the wicked woman when she had reached home went in front of the
glass and asked---


 "Looking-glass, Looking-glass, on the wall,
 Who in this land is the fairest of all?"

and it answered as before---


 "Oh, Queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
 But over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
 Snow-white is still alive and well,

 And none is so fair as she."

When she heard that, all her blood rushed to her heart with fear, for she
saw plainly that little Snow-white was again alive. "But now," she said,
"I will think of something that shall put an end to you," and by the help
of witchcraft, which she understood, she made a poisonous comb. Then
she disguised herself and took the shape of another old woman. So she
went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked at the door,
and cried, "Good things to sell, cheap, cheap!" Little Snow-white looked
out and said, "Go away; I cannot let any one come in." "I suppose you can
look," said the old woman, and pulled the poisonous comb out and held
it up. It pleased the girl so well that she let herself be beguiled,
and opened the door. When they had made a bargain the old woman said,
"Now I will comb you properly for once." Poor little Snow-white had no
suspicion, and let the old woman do as she pleased, but hardly had she
put the comb in her hair than the poison in it took effect, and the girl
fell down senseless. "You paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman,
"you are done for now," and she went away.

But fortunately it was almost evening, when the seven dwarfs came
home. When they saw Snow-white lying as if dead upon the ground they at
once suspected the step-mother, and they looked and found the poisoned
comb. Scarcely had they taken it out when Snow-white came to herself,
and told them what had happened. Then they warned her once more to be
upon her guard and to open the door to no one.

The Queen, at home, went in front of the glass and said---


 "Looking-glass, Looking-glass, on the wall,
 Who in this land is the fairest of all?"

then it answered as before---


 "Oh, Queen, thou art fairest of all I see,
 But over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,
 Snow-white is still alive and well,

