There was once on a time a Fisherman who lived with his wife in a
miserable hovel close by the sea, and every day he went out fishing. And
once as he was sitting with his rod, looking at the clear water,
his line suddenly went down, far down below, and when he drew it up
again he brought out a large Flounder.  Then the Flounder said to him,
"Hark, you Fisherman, I pray you, let me live, I am no Flounder really,
but an enchanted prince. What good will it do you to kill me? I should
not be good to eat, put me in the water again, and let me go."  "Come,"
said the Fisherman, "there is no need for so many words about it---a fish
that can talk I should certainly let go, anyhow," with that he put him
back again into the clear water, and the Flounder went to the bottom,
leaving a long streak of blood behind him. Then the Fisherman got up
and went home to his wife in the hovel.

"Husband," said the woman, "have you caught nothing to-day?" "No," said
the man, "I did catch a Flounder, who said he was an enchanted prince,
so I let him go again." "Did you not wish for anything first?" said the
woman. "No," said the man; "what should I wish for?" "Ah," said the woman,
"it is surely hard to have to live always in this dirty hovel; you might
have wished for a small cottage for us.  Go back and call him. Tell him
we want to have a small cottage, he will certainly give us that." "Ah,"
said the man, "why should I go there again?" "Why," said the woman,
"you did catch him, and you let him go again; he is sure to do it. Go
at once." The man still did not quite like to go, but did not like to
oppose his wife, and went to the sea.

When he got there the sea was all green and yellow, and no longer so
smooth; so he stood still and said,


 "Flounder, flounder in the sea,
 Come, I pray thee, here to me;

 For my wife, good Ilsabil,
 Wills not as I'd have her will."

Then the Flounder came swimming to him and said, "Well what does she
want, then?" "Ah," said the man, "I did catch you, and my wife says I
really ought to have wished for something. She does not like to live
in a wretched hovel any longer. She would like to have a cottage." "Go,
then," said the Flounder, "she has it already."

When the man went home, his wife was no longer in the hovel, but instead
of it there stood a small cottage, and she was sitting on a bench before
the door.  Then she took him by the hand and said to him, "Just come
inside, look, now isn't this a great deal better?" So they went in,
and there was a small porch, and a pretty little parlor and bedroom,
and a kitchen and pantry, with the best of furniture, and fitted up
with the most beautiful things made of tin and brass, whatsoever was
wanted. And behind the cottage there was a small yard, with hens and
ducks, and a little garden with flowers and fruit. "Look," said the wife,
"is not that nice!" "Yes," said the husband, "and so we must always think
it, -- now we will live quite contented." "We will think about that,"
said the wife. With that they ate something and went to bed.

Everything went well for a week or a fortnight, and then the woman
said, "Hark you, husband, this cottage is far too small for us, and
the garden and yard are little; the Flounder might just as well have
given us a larger house. I should like to live in a great stone castle;
go to the Flounder, and tell him to give us a castle."  "Ah, wife,"
said the man, "the cottage is quite good enough; why should we live in a
castle?" "What!" said the woman; "just go there, the Flounder can always
do that." "No, wife," said the man, "the Flounder has just given us the
cottage, I do not like to go back so soon, it might make him angry." "Go,"
said the woman, "he can do it quite easily, and will be glad to do it;
just you go to him."

The man's heart grew heavy, and he would not go. He said to himself,
"It is not right," and yet he went. And when he came to the sea the water
was quite purple and dark-blue, and grey and thick, and no longer so
green and yellow, but it was still quiet. And he stood there and said---


 "Flounder, flounder in the sea,
 Come, I pray thee, here to me;

 For my wife, good Ilsabil,
 Wills not as I'd have her will."

"Well, what does she want, then?" said the Flounder. "Alas," said the
man, half scared, "she wants to live in a great stone castle." "Go to it,
then, she is standing before the door," said the Flounder.

