After this Marlinchen came into the kitchen to her mother, who was
standing by the fire with a pan of hot water before her which she
was constantly stirring round. "Mother," said Marlinchen, "brother is
sitting at the door, and he looks quite white and has an apple in his
hand. I asked him to give me the apple, but he did not answer me, and
I was quite frightened." "Go back to him," said her mother, "and if he
will not answer thee, give him a box on the ear." So Marlinchen went
to him and said, "Brother, give me the apple." But he was silent, and
she gave him a box on the ear, on which his head fell down. Marlinchen
was terrified, and began crying and screaming, and ran to her mother,
and said, "Alas, mother, I have knocked my brother's head off!" and she
wept and wept and could not be comforted. "Marlinchen," said the mother,
"what hast thou done?  but be quiet and let no one know it; it cannot be
helped now, we will make him into black-puddings." Then the mother took
the little boy and chopped him in pieces, put him into the pan and made
him into black puddings; but Marlinchen stood by weeping and weeping,
and all her tears fell into the pan and there was no need of any salt.

Then the father came home, and sat down to dinner and said, "But where
is my son?" And the mother served up a great dish of black-puddings,
and Marlinchen wept and could not leave off. Then the father again said,
"But where is my son?"  "Ah," said the mother, "he has gone across the
country to his mother's great uncle; he will stay there awhile." "And
what is he going to do there? He did not even say good-bye to me."

"Oh, he wanted to go, and asked me if he might stay six weeks, he is well
taken care of there." "Ah," said the man, "I feel so unhappy lest all
should not be right.  He ought to have said good-bye to me." With that he
began to eat and said, "Marlinchen, why art thou crying? Thy brother will
certainly come back." Then he said, "Ah, wife, how delicious this food
is, give me some more." And the more he ate the more he wanted to have,
and he said, "Give me some more, you shall have none of it. It seems to
me as if it were all mine." And he ate and ate and threw all the bones
under the table, until he had finished the whole. But Marlinchen went
away to her chest of drawers, and took her best silk handkerchief out
of the bottom drawer, and got all the bones from beneath the table, and
tied them up in her silk handkerchief, and carried them outside the door,
weeping tears of blood. Then the juniper-tree began to stir itself, and
the branches parted asunder, and moved together again, just as if some
one was rejoicing and clapping his hands. At the same time a mist seemed
to arise from the tree, and in the centre of this mist it burned like a
fire, and a beautiful bird flew out of the fire singing magnificently,
and he flew high up in the air, and when he was gone, the juniper-tree
was just as it had been before, and the handkerchief with the bones was
no longer there. Marlinchen, however, was as gay and happy as if her
brother were still alive. And she went merrily into the house, and sat
down to dinner and ate.

But the bird flew away and lighted on a goldsmith's house, and began
to sing,


 "My mother she killed me,
 My father he ate me,
 My sister, little Marlinchen,
 Gathered together all my bones,
 Tied them in a silken handkerchief,
 Laid them beneath the juniper-tree,

 Kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I!"

The goldsmith was sitting in his workshop making a gold chain, when he
heard the bird which was sitting singing on his roof, and very beautiful
the song seemed to him. He stood up, but as he crossed the threshold
he lost one of his slippers.  But he went away right up the middle
of the street with one shoe on and one sock; he had his apron on,
and in one hand he had the gold chain and in the other the pincers,
and the sun was shining brightly on the street. Then he went right
on and stood still, and said to the bird, "Bird," said he then, "how
beautifully thou canst sing! Sing me that piece again." "No," said the
bird, "I'll not sing it twice for nothing! Give me the golden chain,
and then I will sing it again for thee." "There," said the goldsmith,
"there is the golden chain for thee, now sing me that song again." Then
the bird came and took the golden chain in his right claw, and went and
sat in front of the goldsmith, and sang,


