'Hindley Earnshaw!  Your old friend Hindley,' he replied, 'and my wicked
gossip: though he's been too wild for me this long while.  There!  I said
we should draw water.  But cheer up!  He died true to his character:
drunk as a lord.  Poor lad!  I'm sorry, too.  One can't help missing an
old companion: though he had the worst tricks with him that ever man
imagined, and has done me many a rascally turn.  He's barely
twenty-seven, it seems; that's your own age: who would have thought you
were born in one year?'

I confess this blow was greater to me than the shock of Mrs. Linton's
death: ancient associations lingered round my heart; I sat down in the
porch and wept as for a blood relation, desiring Mr. Kenneth to get
another servant to introduce him to the master.  I could not hinder
myself from pondering on the question--'Had he had fair play?'  Whatever
I did, that idea would bother me: it was so tiresomely pertinacious that
I resolved on requesting leave to go to Wuthering Heights, and assist in
the last duties to the dead.  Mr. Linton was extremely reluctant to
consent, but I pleaded eloquently for the friendless condition in which
he lay; and I said my old master and foster-brother had a claim on my
services as strong as his own.  Besides, I reminded him that the child
Hareton was his wife's nephew, and, in the absence of nearer kin, he
ought to act as its guardian; and he ought to and must inquire how the
property was left, and look over the concerns of his brother-in-law.  He
was unfit for attending to such matters then, but he bid me speak to his
lawyer; and at length permitted me to go.  His lawyer had been Earnshaw's
also: I called at the village, and asked him to accompany me.  He shook
his head, and advised that Heathcliff should be let alone; affirming, if
the truth were known, Hareton would be found little else than a beggar.

'His father died in debt,' he said; 'the whole property is mortgaged, and
the sole chance for the natural heir is to allow him an opportunity of
creating some interest in the creditor's heart, that he may be inclined
to deal leniently towards him.'

When I reached the Heights, I explained that I had come to see everything
carried on decently; and Joseph, who appeared in sufficient distress,
expressed satisfaction at my presence.  Mr. Heathcliff said he did not
perceive that I was wanted; but I might stay and order the arrangements
for the funeral, if I chose.

'Correctly,' he remarked, 'that fool's body should be buried at the
cross-roads, without ceremony of any kind. I happened to leave him ten
minutes yesterday afternoon, and in that interval he fastened the two
doors of the house against me, and he has spent the night in drinking
himself to death deliberately! We broke in this morning, for we heard
him sporting like a horse; and there he was, laid over the settle:
flaying and scalping would not have wakened him. I sent for Kenneth, and
he came; but not till the beast had changed into carrion: he was both
dead and cold, and stark; and so you'll allow it was useless making more
stir about him!'

The old servant confirmed this statement, but muttered:

'I'd rayther he'd goan hisseln for t' doctor!  I sud ha,' taen tent o' t'
maister better nor him--and he warn't deead when I left, naught o' t'
soart!'

I insisted on the funeral being respectable.  Mr. Heathcliff said I might
have my own way there too: only, he desired me to remember that the money
for the whole affair came out of his pocket.  He maintained a hard,
careless deportment, indicative of neither joy nor sorrow: if anything,
it expressed a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult work
successfully executed.  I observed once, indeed, something like
exultation in his aspect: it was just when the people were bearing the
coffin from the house.  He had the hypocrisy to represent a mourner: and
previous to following with Hareton, he lifted the unfortunate child on to
the table and muttered, with peculiar gusto, 'Now, my bonny lad, you are
_mine_!  And we'll see if one tree won't grow as crooked as another, with
the same wind to twist it!'  The unsuspecting thing was pleased at this
speech: he played with Heathcliff's whiskers, and stroked his cheek; but
I divined its meaning, and observed tartly, 'That boy must go back with
me to Thrushcross Grange, sir.  There is nothing in the world less yours
than he is!'

'Does Linton say so?' he demanded.

'Of course--he has ordered me to take him,' I replied.

'Well,' said the scoundrel, 'we'll not argue the subject now: but I have
a fancy to try my hand at rearing a young one; so intimate to your master
that I must supply the place of this with my own, if he attempt to remove
it.  I don't engage to let Hareton go undisputed; but I'll be pretty sure
to make the other come!  Remember to tell him.'

This hint was enough to bind our hands.  I repeated its substance on my
return; and Edgar Linton, little interested at the commencement, spoke no
more of interfering.  I'm not aware that he could have done it to any
purpose, had he been ever so willing.

The guest was now the master of Wuthering Heights: he held firm
possession, and proved to the attorney--who, in his turn, proved it to
Mr. Linton--that Earnshaw had mortgaged every yard of land he owned for
cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he, Heathcliff, was the
mortgagee.  In that manner Hareton, who should now be the first gentleman
in the neighbourhood, was reduced to a state of complete dependence on
his father's inveterate enemy; and lives in his own house as a servant,
deprived of the advantage of wages: quite unable to right himself,
because of his friendlessness, and his ignorance that he has been
wronged.



