'With that I shut the window and returned to my place by the fire; having
too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any anxiety for
the danger that menaced him.  Earnshaw swore passionately at me:
affirming that I loved the villain yet; and calling me all sorts of names
for the base spirit I evinced.  And I, in my secret heart (and conscience
never reproached me), thought what a blessing it would be for _him_
should Heathcliff put him out of misery; and what a blessing for _me_
should he send Heathcliff to his right abode!  As I sat nursing these
reflections, the casement behind me was banged on to the floor by a blow
from the latter individual, and his black countenance looked blightingly
through.  The stanchions stood too close to suffer his shoulders to
follow, and I smiled, exulting in my fancied security.  His hair and
clothes were whitened with snow, and his sharp cannibal teeth, revealed
by cold and wrath, gleamed through the dark.

'"Isabella, let me in, or I'll make you repent!" he "girned," as Joseph
calls it.

'"I cannot commit murder," I replied.  "Mr. Hindley stands sentinel with
a knife and loaded pistol."

'"Let me in by the kitchen door," he said.

'"Hindley will be there before me," I answered: "and that's a poor love
of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow!  We were left at peace in our
beds as long as the summer moon shone, but the moment a blast of winter
returns, you must run for shelter!  Heathcliff, if I were you, I'd go
stretch myself over her grave and die like a faithful dog.  The world is
surely not worth living in now, is it?  You had distinctly impressed on
me the idea that Catherine was the whole joy of your life: I can't
imagine how you think of surviving her loss."

'"He's there, is he?" exclaimed my companion, rushing to the gap.  "If I
can get my arm out I can hit him!"

'I'm afraid, Ellen, you'll set me down as really wicked; but you don't
know all, so don't judge.  I wouldn't have aided or abetted an attempt on
even _his_ life for anything.  Wish that he were dead, I must; and
therefore I was fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by terror for the
consequences of my taunting speech, when he flung himself on Earnshaw's
weapon and wrenched it from his grasp.

'The charge exploded, and the knife, in springing back, closed into its
owner's wrist.  Heathcliff pulled it away by main force, slitting up the
flesh as it passed on, and thrust it dripping into his pocket.  He then
took a stone, struck down the division between two windows, and sprang
in.  His adversary had fallen senseless with excessive pain and the flow
of blood, that gushed from an artery or a large vein.  The ruffian kicked
and trampled on him, and dashed his head repeatedly against the flags,
holding me with one hand, meantime, to prevent me summoning Joseph.  He
exerted preterhuman self-denial in abstaining from finishing him
completely; but getting out of breath, he finally desisted, and dragged
the apparently inanimate body on to the settle.  There he tore off the
sleeve of Earnshaw's coat, and bound up the wound with brutal roughness;
spitting and cursing during the operation as energetically as he had
kicked before.  Being at liberty, I lost no time in seeking the old
servant; who, having gathered by degrees the purport of my hasty tale,
hurried below, gasping, as he descended the steps two at once.

'"What is ther to do, now? what is ther to do, now?"

'"There's this to do," thundered Heathcliff, "that your master's mad; and
should he last another month, I'll have him to an asylum.  And how the
devil did you come to fasten me out, you toothless hound?  Don't stand
muttering and mumbling there.  Come, I'm not going to nurse him.  Wash
that stuff away; and mind the sparks of your candle--it is more than half
brandy!"

'"And so ye've been murthering on him?" exclaimed Joseph, lifting his
hands and eyes in horror.  "If iver I seed a seeght loike this!  May the
Lord--"

'Heathcliff gave him a push on to his knees in the middle of the blood,
and flung a towel to him; but instead of proceeding to dry it up, he
joined his hands and began a prayer, which excited my laughter from its
odd phraseology.  I was in the condition of mind to be shocked at
nothing: in fact, I was as reckless as some malefactors show themselves
at the foot of the gallows.

'"Oh, I forgot you," said the tyrant.  "You shall do that.  Down with
you.  And you conspire with him against me, do you, viper?  There, that
is work fit for you!"

'He shook me till my teeth rattled, and pitched me beside Joseph, who
steadily concluded his supplications, and then rose, vowing he would set
off for the Grange directly.  Mr. Linton was a magistrate, and though he
had fifty wives dead, he should inquire into this.  He was so obstinate
in his resolution, that Heathcliff deemed it expedient to compel from my
lips a recapitulation of what had taken place; standing over me, heaving
with malevolence, as I reluctantly delivered the account in answer to his
questions.  It required a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man
that Heathcliff was not the aggressor; especially with my hardly-wrung
replies.  However, Mr. Earnshaw soon convinced him that he was alive
still; Joseph hastened to administer a dose of spirits, and by their
succour his master presently regained motion and consciousness.
Heathcliff, aware that his opponent was ignorant of the treatment
received while insensible, called him deliriously intoxicated; and said
he should not notice his atrocious conduct further, but advised him to
get to bed.  To my joy, he left us, after giving this judicious counsel,
and Hindley stretched himself on the hearthstone.  I departed to my own
room, marvelling that I had escaped so easily.

'This morning, when I came down, about half an hour before noon, Mr.
Earnshaw was sitting by the fire, deadly sick; his evil genius, almost as
gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney.  Neither appeared inclined
to dine, and, having waited till all was cold on the table, I commenced
alone.  Nothing hindered me from eating heartily, and I experienced a
certain sense of satisfaction and superiority, as, at intervals, I cast a
look towards my silent companions, and felt the comfort of a quiet
conscience within me.  After I had done, I ventured on the unusual
liberty of drawing near the fire, going round Earnshaw's seat, and
kneeling in the corner beside him.

'Heathcliff did not glance my way, and I gazed up, and contemplated his
features almost as confidently as if they had been turned to stone.  His
forehead, that I once thought so manly, and that I now think so
diabolical, was shaded with a heavy cloud; his basilisk eyes were nearly
quenched by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps, for the lashes were wet
then: his lips devoid of their ferocious sneer, and sealed in an
expression of unspeakable sadness.  Had it been another, I would have
covered my face in the presence of such grief.  In _his_ case, I was
gratified; and, ignoble as it seems to insult a fallen enemy, I couldn't
miss this chance of sticking in a dart: his weakness was the only time
when I could taste the delight of paying wrong for wrong.'

'Fie, fie, Miss!' I interrupted.  'One might suppose you had never opened
a Bible in your life.  If God afflict your enemies, surely that ought to
suffice you.  It is both mean and presumptuous to add your torture to
his!'

