'Well, well,' cried her husband, crossly, 'don't strangle me for that!  He
never struck me as such a marvellous treasure.  There is no need to be
frantic!'

'I know you didn't like him,' she answered, repressing a little the
intensity of her delight.  'Yet, for my sake, you must be friends now.
Shall I tell him to come up?'

'Here,' he said, 'into the parlour?'

'Where else?' she asked.

He looked vexed, and suggested the kitchen as a more suitable place for
him.  Mrs. Linton eyed him with a droll expression--half angry, half
laughing at his fastidiousness.

'No,' she added, after a while; 'I cannot sit in the kitchen.  Set two
tables here, Ellen: one for your master and Miss Isabella, being gentry;
the other for Heathcliff and myself, being of the lower orders.  Will
that please you, dear?  Or must I have a fire lighted elsewhere?  If so,
give directions.  I'll run down and secure my guest.  I'm afraid the joy
is too great to be real!'

She was about to dart off again; but Edgar arrested her.

'_You_ bid him step up,' he said, addressing me; 'and, Catherine, try to
be glad, without being absurd.  The whole household need not witness the
sight of your welcoming a runaway servant as a brother.'

I descended, and found Heathcliff waiting under the porch, evidently
anticipating an invitation to enter.  He followed my guidance without
waste of words, and I ushered him into the presence of the master and
mistress, whose flushed cheeks betrayed signs of warm talking.  But the
lady's glowed with another feeling when her friend appeared at the door:
she sprang forward, took both his hands, and led him to Linton; and then
she seized Linton's reluctant fingers and crushed them into his.  Now,
fully revealed by the fire and candlelight, I was amazed, more than ever,
to behold the transformation of Heathcliff.  He had grown a tall,
athletic, well-formed man; beside whom my master seemed quite slender and
youth-like.  His upright carriage suggested the idea of his having been
in the army.  His countenance was much older in expression and decision
of feature than Mr. Linton's; it looked intelligent, and retained no
marks of former degradation.  A half-civilised ferocity lurked yet in the
depressed brows and eyes full of black fire, but it was subdued; and his
manner was even dignified: quite divested of roughness, though stern for
grace.  My master's surprise equalled or exceeded mine: he remained for a
minute at a loss how to address the ploughboy, as he had called him.
Heathcliff dropped his slight hand, and stood looking at him coolly till
he chose to speak.

'Sit down, sir,' he said, at length.  'Mrs. Linton, recalling old times,
would have me give you a cordial reception; and, of course, I am
gratified when anything occurs to please her.'

'And I also,' answered Heathcliff, 'especially if it be anything in which
I have a part.  I shall stay an hour or two willingly.'

He took a seat opposite Catherine, who kept her gaze fixed on him as if
she feared he would vanish were she to remove it.  He did not raise his
to her often: a quick glance now and then sufficed; but it flashed back,
each time more confidently, the undisguised delight he drank from hers.
They were too much absorbed in their mutual joy to suffer embarrassment.
Not so Mr. Edgar: he grew pale with pure annoyance: a feeling that
reached its climax when his lady rose, and stepping across the rug,
seized Heathcliff's hands again, and laughed like one beside herself.

'I shall think it a dream to-morrow!' she cried.  'I shall not be able to
believe that I have seen, and touched, and spoken to you once more.  And
yet, cruel Heathcliff! you don't deserve this welcome.  To be absent and
silent for three years, and never to think of me!'

'A little more than you have thought of me,' he murmured.  'I heard of
your marriage, Cathy, not long since; and, while waiting in the yard
below, I meditated this plan--just to have one glimpse of your face, a
stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretended pleasure; afterwards settle my
score with Hindley; and then prevent the law by doing execution on
myself.  Your welcome has put these ideas out of my mind; but beware of
meeting me with another aspect next time!  Nay, you'll not drive me off
again.  You were really sorry for me, were you?  Well, there was cause.
I've fought through a bitter life since I last heard your voice; and you
must forgive me, for I struggled only for you!'

'Catherine, unless we are to have cold tea, please to come to the table,'
interrupted Linton, striving to preserve his ordinary tone, and a due
measure of politeness.  'Mr. Heathcliff will have a long walk, wherever
he may lodge to-night; and I'm thirsty.'

She took her post before the urn; and Miss Isabella came, summoned by the
bell; then, having handed their chairs forward, I left the room.  The
meal hardly endured ten minutes.  Catherine's cup was never filled: she
could neither eat nor drink.  Edgar had made a slop in his saucer, and
scarcely swallowed a mouthful.  Their guest did not protract his stay
that evening above an hour longer.  I asked, as he departed, if he went
to Gimmerton?

'No, to Wuthering Heights,' he answered: 'Mr. Earnshaw invited me, when I
called this morning.'


