The evening after the funeral, my young lady and I were seated in the
library; now musing mournfully--one of us despairingly--on our loss, now
venturing conjectures as to the gloomy future.

We had just agreed the best destiny which could await Catherine would be
a permission to continue resident at the Grange; at least during Linton's
life: he being allowed to join her there, and I to remain as housekeeper.
That seemed rather too favourable an arrangement to be hoped for; and yet
I did hope, and began to cheer up under the prospect of retaining my home
and my employment, and, above all, my beloved young mistress; when a
servant--one of the discarded ones, not yet departed--rushed hastily in,
and said 'that devil Heathcliff' was coming through the court: should he
fasten the door in his face?

If we had been mad enough to order that proceeding, we had not time.  He
made no ceremony of knocking or announcing his name: he was master, and
availed himself of the master's privilege to walk straight in, without
saying a word.  The sound of our informant's voice directed him to the
library; he entered and motioning him out, shut the door.

It was the same room into which he had been ushered, as a guest, eighteen
years before: the same moon shone through the window; and the same autumn
landscape lay outside.  We had not yet lighted a candle, but all the
apartment was visible, even to the portraits on the wall: the splendid
head of Mrs. Linton, and the graceful one of her husband.  Heathcliff
advanced to the hearth.  Time had little altered his person either.  There
was the same man: his dark face rather sallower and more composed, his
frame a stone or two heavier, perhaps, and no other difference.  Catherine
had risen with an impulse to dash out, when she saw him.

'Stop!' he said, arresting her by the arm.  'No more runnings away!  Where
would you go?  I'm come to fetch you home; and I hope you'll be a dutiful
daughter and not encourage my son to further disobedience.  I was
embarrassed how to punish him when I discovered his part in the business:
he's such a cobweb, a pinch would annihilate him; but you'll see by his
look that he has received his due!  I brought him down one evening, the
day before yesterday, and just set him in a chair, and never touched him
afterwards.  I sent Hareton out, and we had the room to ourselves.  In
two hours, I called Joseph to carry him up again; and since then my
presence is as potent on his nerves as a ghost; and I fancy he sees me
often, though I am not near.  Hareton says he wakes and shrieks in the
night by the hour together, and calls you to protect him from me; and,
whether you like your precious mate, or not, you must come: he's your
concern now; I yield all my interest in him to you.'

'Why not let Catherine continue here,' I pleaded, 'and send Master Linton
to her?  As you hate them both, you'd not miss them: they can only be a
daily plague to your unnatural heart.'

'I'm seeking a tenant for the Grange,' he answered; 'and I want my
children about me, to be sure.  Besides, that lass owes me her services
for her bread.  I'm not going to nurture her in luxury and idleness after
Linton is gone.  Make haste and get ready, now; and don't oblige me to
compel you.'

'I shall,' said Catherine.  'Linton is all I have to love in the world,
and though you have done what you could to make him hateful to me, and me
to him, you cannot make us hate each other.  And I defy you to hurt him
when I am by, and I defy you to frighten me!'

'You are a boastful champion,' replied Heathcliff; 'but I don't like you
well enough to hurt him: you shall get the full benefit of the torment,
as long as it lasts.  It is not I who will make him hateful to you--it is
his own sweet spirit.  He's as bitter as gall at your desertion and its
consequences: don't expect thanks for this noble devotion.  I heard him
draw a pleasant picture to Zillah of what he would do if he were as
strong as I: the inclination is there, and his very weakness will sharpen
his wits to find a substitute for strength.'

'I know he has a bad nature,' said Catherine: 'he's your son.  But I'm
glad I've a better, to forgive it; and I know he loves me, and for that
reason I love him.  Mr. Heathcliff _you_ have _nobody_ to love you; and,
however miserable you make us, we shall still have the revenge of
thinking that your cruelty arises from your greater misery.  You _are_
miserable, are you not?  Lonely, like the devil, and envious like him?
_Nobody_ loves you--_nobody_ will cry for you when you die!  I wouldn't
be you!'

Catherine spoke with a kind of dreary triumph: she seemed to have made up
her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and draw pleasure
from the griefs of her enemies.

'You shall be sorry to be yourself presently,' said her father-in-law,
'if you stand there another minute.  Begone, witch, and get your things!'

She scornfully withdrew.  In her absence I began to beg for Zillah's
place at the Heights, offering to resign mine to her; but he would suffer
it on no account.  He bid me be silent; and then, for the first time,
allowed himself a glance round the room and a look at the pictures.
Having studied Mrs. Linton's, he said--'I shall have that home.  Not
because I need it, but--'  He turned abruptly to the fire, and continued,
with what, for lack of a better word, I must call a smile--'I'll tell you
what I did yesterday!  I got the sexton, who was digging Linton's grave,
to remove the earth off her coffin lid, and I opened it.  I thought,
once, I would have stayed there: when I saw her face again--it is hers
yet!--he had hard work to stir me; but he said it would change if the air
blew on it, and so I struck one side of the coffin loose, and covered it
up: not Linton's side, damn him!  I wish he'd been soldered in lead.  And
I bribed the sexton to pull it away when I'm laid there, and slide mine
out too; I'll have it made so: and then by the time Linton gets to us
he'll not know which is which!'

'You were very wicked, Mr. Heathcliff!' I exclaimed; 'were you not
ashamed to disturb the dead?'

'I disturbed nobody, Nelly,' he replied; 'and I gave some ease to myself.
I shall be a great deal more comfortable now; and you'll have a better
chance of keeping me underground, when I get there.  Disturbed her?  No!
she has disturbed me, night and day, through eighteen
years--incessantly--remorselessly--till yesternight; and yesternight I
was tranquil.  I dreamt I was sleeping the last sleep by that sleeper,
with my heart stopped and my cheek frozen against hers.'

'And if she had been dissolved into earth, or worse, what would you have
dreamt of then?' I said.


