In the universal use made of it, gesticulation has some analogy with
logic and grammar, in that it has to do with the form, rather
than with the matter of conversation; but on the other hand it is
distinguishable from them by the fact that it has more of a moral than
of an intellectual bearing; in other words, it reflects the movements
of the will. As an accompaniment of conversation it is like the bass
of a melody; and if, as in music, it keeps true to the progress of the
treble, it serves to heighten the effect.

In a conversation, the gesture depends upon the form in which the
subject-matter is conveyed; and it is interesting to observe that,
whatever that subject-matter may be, with a recurrence of the form,
the very same gesture is repeated. So if I happen to see--from my
window, say--two persons carrying on a lively conversation, without
my being able to catch a word, I can, nevertheless, understand the
general nature of it perfectly well; I mean, the kind of thing that is
being said and the form it takes. There is no mistake about it. The
speaker is arguing about something, advancing his reasons, then
limiting their application, then driving them home and drawing the
conclusion in triumph; or he is recounting his experiences, proving,
perhaps, beyond the shadow of a doubt, how much he has been injured,
but bringing the clearest and most damning evidence to show that
his opponents were foolish and obstinate people who would not be
convinced; or else he is telling of the splendid plan he laid, and how
he carried it to a successful issue, or perhaps failed because
the luck was against him; or, it may be, he is saying that he was
completely at a loss to know what to do, or that he was quick in
seeing some traps set for him, and that by insisting on his rights or
by applying a little force, he succeeded in frustrating and punishing
his enemies; and so on in hundreds of cases of a similar kind.

Strictly speaking, however, what I get from gesticulation alone is
an abstract notion of the essential drift of what is being said, and
that, too, whether I judge from a moral or an intellectual point of
view. It is the quintessence, the true substance of the conversation,
and this remains identical, no matter what may have given rise to the
conversation, or what it may be about; the relation between the two
being that of a general idea or class-name to the individuals which it
covers.

As I have said, the most interesting and amusing part of the matter is
the complete identity and solidarity of the gestures used to denote
the same set of circumstances, even though by people of very different
temperament; so that the gestures become exactly like words of
a language, alike for every one, and subject only to such small
modifications as depend upon variety of accent and education. And yet
there can be no doubt but that these standing gestures, which every
one uses, are the result of no convention or collusion. They are
original and innate--a true language of nature; consolidated, it may
be, by imitation and the influence of custom.

It is well known that it is part of an actor's duty to make a careful
study of gesture; and the same thing is true, to a somewhat smaller
degree, of a public speaker. This study must consist chiefly in
watching others and imitating their movements, for there are no
abstract rules fairly applicable to the matter, with the exception
of some very general leading principles, such as--to take an
example--that the gesture must not follow the word, but rather
come immediately before it, by way of announcing its approach and
attracting the hearer's attention.

Englishmen entertain a peculiar contempt for gesticulation, and look
upon it as something vulgar and undignified. This seems to me a silly
prejudice on their part, and the outcome of their general prudery. For
here we have a language which nature has given to every one, and which
every one understands; and to do away with and forbid it for no better
reason than that it is opposed to that much-lauded thing, gentlemanly
feeling, is a very questionable proceeding.


