As a messenger, if the heart of the Presence be moved to so great
favour. And on six rupees. Yes, Sahib, for I have three little children
whose stomachs are always empty, and corn is now but forty pounds to
the rupee. I will make so clever a messenger that you shall all day
long be pleased with me, and, at the end of the year, bestow a turban.
I know all the roads of the Station and many other things. Aha, Sahib!
I am clever. Give me service. I was aforetime in the Police. A bad
character? Now without doubt an enemy has told this tale. Never was
I a scamp. I am a man of clean heart, and all my words are true. They
knew this when I was in the Police. They said: 'Afzal Khan is a true
speaker in whose words men may trust.' I am a Delhi Pathan, Sahib--all
Delhi Pathans are good men. You have seen Delhi? Yes, it is true that
there be many scamps among the Delhi Pathans. How wise is the Sahib!
Nothing is hid from his eyes, and he will make me his messenger, and
I will take all his notes secretly and without ostentation. Nay, Sahib,
God is my witness that I meant no evil. I have long desired to serve
under a true Sahib--a virtuous Sahib. Many young Sahibs are as devils
unchained. With these Sahibs I would take no service--not though all
the stomachs of my little children were crying for bread.

Why am I not still in the Police? I will speak true talk. An evil came
to the Thana--to Ram Baksh, the Havildar, and Maula Baksh, and Juggut
Ram and Bhim Singh and Suruj Bul. Ram Baksh is in the jail for a space,
and so also is Maula Baksh.

It was at the Thana of Howli, on the road that leads to Gokral-Seetarun
wherein are many dacoits. We were all brave men--Rustums. Wherefore
we were sent to that Thana which was eight miles from the next Thana.
All day and all night we watched for dacoits. Why does the Sahib laugh?
Nay, I will make a confession. The dacoits were too clever, and, seeing
this, we made no further trouble. It was in the hot weather. What can
a man do in the hot days? Is the Sahib who is so strong--is he, even,
vigorous in that hour? We made an arrangement with the dacoits for the
sake of peace. That was the work of the Havildar who was fat. Ho! Ho!
Sahib, he is now getting thin in the jail among the carpets. The
Havildar said:' Give us no trouble, and we will give you no trouble.
At the end of the reaping send us a man to lead before the judge, a
man of infirm mind against whom the trumped-up case will break down,
Thus we shall save our honour.' To this talk the dacoits agreed, and
we had no trouble at the Thana, and could eat melons in peace, sitting
upon our charpoys all day long. Sweet as sugar-cane are the melons of
Howli.

Now there was an assistant commissioner--a Stunt Sahib, in that
district, called Yunkum Sahib. Aha! He was hard-hard even as is the
Sahib who, without doubt, will give me the shadow of his protection.
Many eyes had Yunkum Sahib, and moved quickly through his district.
Men called him The Tiger of Gokral-Seetarun, because he would arrive
unannounced and make his kill, and, before sunset, would be giving
trouble to the Tehsildars thirty miles away. No one knew the comings
or the goings of Yunkum Sahib. He had no camp, and when his horse was
weary he rode upon a devil-carriage. I do not know its name, but the
Sahib sat in the midst of three silver wheels that made no creaking,
and drave them with his legs, prancing like a bean-fed horse--thus.
A shadow of a hawk upon the fields was not more without noise than the
devil-carriage of Yunkum Sahib. It was here: it was there: it was gone:
and the rapport was made, and there was trouble. Ask the Tehsildar of
Rohestri how the hen-stealing came to be known, Sahib.

It fell upon a night that we of the Thana slept according to custom
upon our charpoys, having eaten the evening meal and drunk tobacco.
When we awoke in the morning, behold, of our six rifles not one
remained! Also, the big Police-book that was in the Havildar's charge
was gone. Seeing these things, we were very much afraid, thinking on
our parts that the dacoits, regardless of honour, had come by night,
and put us to shame. Then said Ram Baksh, the Havildar:' Be silent!
The business is an evil business, but it may yet go well. Let us make
the case complete. Bring a kid and my tulwar. See you not now, O fools?
A kick for a horse, but a word is enough for a man.'


