Then we meets Orth'ris, an' that little man, bein' sharp as a needle,
seed his way through t' business in a minute. An' he went to work
a-practisin' 'air-dyes the very next day, beginnin' on some white
rabbits he had, an' then he drored all Rip's markin's on t' back of
a white Commissariat bullock, so as to get his 'and in an' be sure of
his colours; shadin' off brown into black as nateral as life. If Rip
_hed_ a fault it was too mich markin', but it was straingely reg'lar
an' Orth'ris settled himself to make a fost-rate job on it when he got
haud o' t' Canteen Sargint's dog. Theer niver was sich a dog as thot
for bad timper, an' it did nut get no better when his tail hed to be
fettled an inch an' a half shorter. But they may talk o' theer Royal
Academies as they like. _I_ niver seed a bit o' animal paintin' to
beat t' copy as Orth'ris made of Rip's marks, wal t' picter itself was
snarlin' all t' time an' tryin' to get at Rip standin' theer to be
copied as good as goold.

Orth'ris allus hed as mich conceit on himsen as would lift a balloon,
an' he wor so pleeased wi' his sham Rip he wor for tekking him to Mrs.
DeSussa before she went away. But Mulvaney an' me stopped thot, knowin'
Orth'ris's work, though niver so cliver, was nobut skin-deep.

An' at last Mrs. DeSussa fixed t' day for startin' to Munsooree Pahar.
We was to tek Rip to t' stayshun i' a basket an' hand him ovver just
when they was ready to start, an' then she'd give us t' brass--as was
agreed upon.

An' my wod! It were high time she were off, for them 'air-dyes upon
t' cur's back took a vast of paintin' to keep t' reet culler, tho'
Orth'ris spent a matter o' seven rupees six annas i' t' best drooggist
shops i' Calcutta.

An' t' Canteen Sargint was lookin' for 'is dog everywheer; an', wi'
bein' tied up, t' beast's timper got waur nor ever.

It wor i' t' evenin' when t' train started thro' Howrah, an' we 'elped
Mrs. DeSussa wi' about sixty boxes, an' then we gave her t' basket.
Orth'ris, for pride av his work, axed us to let him coom along wi' us,
an' he couldn't help liftin' t' lid an' showin' t' cur as he lay coiled
oop.

'Oh!' says t' awd lass; 'the beautee! How sweet he looks!' An' just
then t' beauty snarled an' showed his teeth, so Mulvaney shuts down
t' lid and says: 'Ye'll be careful, marm, whin ye tek him out. He's
disaccustomed to travelling by t' railway, an' he'll be sure to want
his rale mistress an' his friend Learoyd, so ye'll make allowance for
his feelings at fost.'

She would do all thot an' more for the dear, good Rip, an' she would
nut oppen t' basket till they were miles away, for fear anybody should
recognise him, an' we were real good and kind soldier-men, we were,
an' she bonds me a bundle o' notes, an' then cooms up a few of her
relations an' friends to say good-by--not more than seventy-five there
wasn't--an' we cuts away.

What coom to t' three hundred and fifty rupees? Thot's what I can
scarcelins tell yo', but we melted it--we melted it. It was share an'
share alike, for Mulvaney said: 'If Learoyd got hold of Mrs. DeSussa
first, sure 'twas I that renumbered the Sargint's dog just in the nick
av time, an' Orth'ris was the artist av janius that made a work av art
out av that ugly piece av ill-nature. Yet, by way av a thank-offerin'
that I was not led into felony by that wicked ould woman, I'll send
a thrifle to Father Victor for the poor people he's always beggin'
for.'

But me an' Orth'ris, he bein' Cockney an' I bein' pretty far north,
did nut see it i' t' saame way. We'd getten t' brass, an' we meaned
to keep it. An' soa we did--for a short time.

Noa, noa, we niver heered a wod more o' t' awd lass. Our rig'mint went
to Pindi, an' t' Canteen Sargint he got himself another tyke insteead
o' t' one 'at got lost so reg'lar, an' was lost for good at last.



