The season of strikes seemed to have run itself to a standstill.  Almost
every trade and industry and calling in which a dislocation could
possibly be engineered had indulged in that luxury.  The last and least
successful convulsion had been the strike of the World's Union of
Zoological Garden attendants, who, pending the settlement of certain
demands, refused to minister further to the wants of the animals
committed to their charge or to allow any other keepers to take their
place.  In this case the threat of the Zoological Gardens authorities
that if the men "came out" the animals should come out also had
intensified and precipitated the crisis.  The imminent prospect of the
larger carnivores, to say nothing of rhinoceroses and bull bison, roaming
at large and unfed in the heart of London, was not one which permitted of
prolonged conferences.  The Government of the day, which from its
tendency to be a few hours behind the course of events had been nicknamed
the Government of the afternoon, was obliged to intervene with
promptitude and decision.  A strong force of Bluejackets was despatched
to Regent's Park to take over the temporarily abandoned duties of the
strikers.  Bluejackets were chosen in preference to land forces, partly
on account of the traditional readiness of the British Navy to go
anywhere and do anything, partly by reason of the familiarity of the
average sailor with monkeys, parrots, and other tropical fauna, but
chiefly at the urgent request of the First Lord of the Admiralty, who was
keenly desirous of an opportunity for performing some personal act of
unobtrusive public service within the province of his department.

"If he insists on feeding the infant jaguar himself, in defiance of its
mother's wishes, there may be another by-election in the north," said one
of his colleagues, with a hopeful inflection in his voice.  "By-elections
are not very desirable at present, but we must not be selfish."

As a matter of fact the strike collapsed peacefully without any outside
intervention.  The majority of the keepers had become so attached to
their charges that they returned to work of their own accord.

And then the nation and the newspapers turned with a sense of relief to
happier things.  It seemed as if a new era of contentment was about to
dawn.  Everybody had struck who could possibly want to strike or who
could possibly be cajoled or bullied into striking, whether they wanted
to or not.  The lighter and brighter side of life might now claim some
attention.  And conspicuous among the other topics that sprang into
sudden prominence was the pending Falvertoon divorce suit.

The Duke of Falvertoon was one of those human _hors d'oeuvres_ that
stimulate the public appetite for sensation without giving it much to
feed on.  As a mere child he had been precociously brilliant; he had
declined the editorship of the _Anglian Review_ at an age when most boys
are content to have declined _mensa_, a table, and though he could not
claim to have originated the Futurist movement in literature, his
"Letters to a possible Grandson," written at the age of fourteen, had
attracted considerable notice.  In later days his brilliancy had been
less conspicuously displayed.  During a debate in the House of Lords on
affairs in Morocco, at a moment when that country, for the fifth time in
seven years, had brought half Europe to the verge of war, he had
interpolated the remark "a little Moor and how much it is," but in spite
of the encouraging reception accorded to this one political utterance he
was never tempted to a further display in that direction.  It began to be
generally understood that he did not intend to supplement his numerous
town and country residences by living overmuch in the public eye.

And then had come the unlooked-for tidings of the imminent proceedings
for divorce.  And such a divorce!  There were cross-suits and allegations
and counter-allegations, charges of cruelty and desertion, everything in
fact that was necessary to make the case one of the most complicated and
sensational of its kind.  And the number of distinguished people involved
or cited as witnesses not only embraced both political parties in the
realm and several Colonial governors, but included an exotic contingent
from France, Hungary, the United States of North America, and the Grand
Duchy of Baden.  Hotel accommodation of the more expensive sort began to
experience a strain on its resources.  "It will be quite like the Durbar
without the elephants," exclaimed an enthusiastic lady who, to do her
justice, had never seen a Durbar.  The general feeling was one of
thankfulness that the last of the strikes had been got over before the
date fixed for the hearing of the great suit.

As a reaction from the season of gloom and industrial strife that had
just passed away the agencies that purvey and stage-manage sensations
laid themselves out to do their level best on this momentous occasion.
Men who had made their reputations as special descriptive writers were
mobilised from distant corners of Europe and the further side of the
Atlantic in order to enrich with their pens the daily printed records of
the case; one word-painter, who specialised in descriptions of how
witnesses turn pale under cross-examination, was summoned hurriedly back
from a famous and prolonged murder trial in Sicily, where indeed his
talents were being decidedly wasted.  Thumb-nail artists and expert kodak
manipulators were retained at extravagant salaries, and special dress
reporters were in high demand.  An enterprising Paris firm of costume
builders presented the defendant Duchess with three special creations, to
be worn, marked, learned, and extensively reported at various critical
stages of the trial; and as for the cinematograph agents, their industry
and persistence was untiring.  Films representing the Duke saying good-
bye to his favourite canary on the eve of the trial were in readiness
weeks before the event was due to take place; other films depicted the
Duchess holding imaginary consultations with fictitious lawyers or making
a light repast off specially advertised vegetarian sandwiches during a
supposed luncheon interval.  As far as human foresight and human
enterprise could go nothing was lacking to make the trial a success.

Two days before the case was down for hearing the advance reporter of an
important syndicate obtained an interview with the Duke for the purpose
of gleaning some final grains of information concerning his Grace's
personal arrangements during the trial.


