"It's not the daily grind that I complain of," said Blenkinthrope
resentfully; "it's the dull grey sameness of my life outside of office
hours.  Nothing of interest comes my way, nothing remarkable or out of
the common.  Even the little things that I do try to find some interest
in don't seem to interest other people.  Things in my garden, for
instance."

"The potato that weighed just over two pounds," said his friend Gorworth.

"Did I tell you about that?" said Blenkinthrope; "I was telling the
others in the train this morning.  I forgot if I'd told you."

"To be exact you told me that it weighed just under two pounds, but I
took into account the fact that abnormal vegetables and freshwater fish
have an after-life, in which growth is not arrested."

"You're just like the others," said Blenkinthrope sadly, "you only make
fun of it."

"The fault is with the potato, not with us," said Gorworth; "we are not
in the least interested in it because it is not in the least interesting.
The men you go up in the train with every day are just in the same case
as yourself; their lives are commonplace and not very interesting to
themselves, and they certainly are not going to wax enthusiastic over the
commonplace events in other men's lives.  Tell them something startling,
dramatic, piquant that has happened to yourself or to someone in your
family, and you will capture their interest at once.  They will talk
about you with a certain personal pride to all their acquaintances.  'Man
I know intimately, fellow called Blenkinthrope, lives down my way, had
two of his fingers clawed clean off by a lobster he was carrying home to
supper.  Doctor says entire hand may have to come off.'  Now that is
conversation of a very high order.  But imagine walking into a tennis
club with the remark: 'I know a man who has grown a potato weighing two
and a quarter pounds.'"

"But hang it all, my dear fellow," said Blenkinthrope impatiently,
"haven't I just told you that nothing of a remarkable nature ever happens
to me?"

"Invent something," said Gorworth.  Since winning a prize for excellence
in Scriptural knowledge at a preparatory school he had felt licensed to
be a little more unscrupulous than the circle he moved in.  Much might
surely be excused to one who in early life could give a list of seventeen
trees mentioned in the Old Testament.

"What sort of thing?" asked Blenkinthrope, somewhat snappishly.

"A snake got into your hen-run yesterday morning and killed six out of
seven pullets, first mesmerising them with its eyes and then biting them
as they stood helpless.  The seventh pullet was one of that French sort,
with feathers all over its eyes, so it escaped the mesmeric snare, and
just flew at what it could see of the snake and pecked it to pieces."

"Thank you," said Blenkinthrope stiffly; "it's a very clever invention.
If such a thing had really happened in my poultry-run I admit I should
have been proud and interested to tell people about it.  But I'd rather
stick to fact, even if it is plain fact."  All the same his mind dwelt
wistfully on the story of the Seventh Pullet.  He could picture himself
telling it in the train amid the absorbed interest of his
fellow-passengers.  Unconsciously all sorts of little details and
improvements began to suggest themselves.

Wistfulness was still his dominant mood when he took his seat in the
railway carriage the next morning.  Opposite him sat Stevenham, who had
attained to a recognised brevet of importance through the fact of an
uncle having dropped dead in the act of voting at a Parliamentary
election.  That had happened three years ago, but Stevenham was still
deferred to on all questions of home and foreign politics.

"Hullo, how's the giant mushroom, or whatever it was?" was all the notice
Blenkinthrope got from his fellow travellers.

Young Duckby, whom he mildly disliked, speedily monopolised the general
attention by an account of a domestic bereavement.

"Had four young pigeons carried off last night by a whacking big rat.  Oh,
a monster he must have been; you could tell by the size of the hole he
made breaking into the loft."

No moderate-sized rat ever seemed to carry out any predatory operations
in these regions; they were all enormous in their enormity.

"Pretty hard lines that," continued Duckby, seeing that he had secured
the attention and respect of the company; "four squeakers carried off at
one swoop.  You'd find it rather hard to match that in the way of
unlooked-for bad luck."

"I had six pullets out of a pen of seven killed by a snake yesterday
afternoon," said Blenkinthrope, in a voice which he hardly recognised as
his own.


