I had not been at home above ten days, when Captain William Robinson, a
Cornish man, commander of the Hopewell, a stout ship of three hundred
tons, came to my house.  I had formerly been surgeon of another ship
where he was master, and a fourth part owner, in a voyage to the Levant.
He had always treated me more like a brother, than an inferior officer;
and, hearing of my arrival, made me a visit, as I apprehended only out of
friendship, for nothing passed more than what is usual after long
absences.  But repeating his visits often, expressing his joy to find I
me in good health, asking, "whether I were now settled for life?" adding,
"that he intended a voyage to the East Indies in two months," at last he
plainly invited me, though with some apologies, to be surgeon of the
ship; "that I should have another surgeon under me, beside our two mates;
that my salary should be double to the usual pay; and that having
experienced my knowledge in sea-affairs to be at least equal to his, he
would enter into any engagement to follow my advice, as much as if I had
shared in the command."

He said so many other obliging things, and I knew him to be so honest a
man, that I could not reject this proposal; the thirst I had of seeing
the world, notwithstanding my past misfortunes, continuing as violent as
ever.  The only difficulty that remained, was to persuade my wife, whose
consent however I at last obtained, by the prospect of advantage she
proposed to her children.

We set out the 5th day of August, 1706, and arrived at Fort St. George
the 11th of April, 1707.  We staid there three weeks to refresh our crew,
many of whom were sick.  From thence we went to Tonquin, where the
captain resolved to continue some time, because many of the goods he
intended to buy were not ready, nor could he expect to be dispatched in
several months.  Therefore, in hopes to defray some of the charges he
must be at, he bought a sloop, loaded it with several sorts of goods,
wherewith the Tonquinese usually trade to the neighbouring islands, and
putting fourteen men on board, whereof three were of the country, he
appointed me master of the sloop, and gave me power to traffic, while he
transacted his affairs at Tonquin.

We had not sailed above three days, when a great storm arising, we were
driven five days to the north-north-east, and then to the east: after
which we had fair weather, but still with a pretty strong gale from the
west.  Upon the tenth day we were chased by two pirates, who soon
overtook us; for my sloop was so deep laden, that she sailed very slow,
neither were we in a condition to defend ourselves.

We were boarded about the same time by both the pirates, who entered
furiously at the head of their men; but finding us all prostrate upon our
faces (for so I gave order), they pinioned us with strong ropes, and
setting guard upon us, went to search the sloop.

I observed among them a Dutchman, who seemed to be of some authority,
though he was not commander of either ship.  He knew us by our
countenances to be Englishmen, and jabbering to us in his own language,
swore we should be tied back to back and thrown into the sea.  I spoken
Dutch tolerably well; I told him who we were, and begged him, in
consideration of our being Christians and Protestants, of neighbouring
countries in strict alliance, that he would move the captains to take
some pity on us.  This inflamed his rage; he repeated his threatenings,
and turning to his companions, spoke with great vehemence in the Japanese
language, as I suppose, often using the word _Christianos_.

The largest of the two pirate ships was commanded by a Japanese captain,
who spoke a little Dutch, but very imperfectly.  He came up to me, and
after several questions, which I answered in great humility, he said, "we
should not die."  I made the captain a very low bow, and then, turning to
the Dutchman, said, "I was sorry to find more mercy in a heathen, than in
a brother christian."  But I had soon reason to repent those foolish
words: for that malicious reprobate, having often endeavoured in vain to
persuade both the captains that I might be thrown into the sea (which
they would not yield to, after the promise made me that I should not
die), however, prevailed so far, as to have a punishment inflicted on me,
worse, in all human appearance, than death itself.  My men were sent by
an equal division into both the pirate ships, and my sloop new manned.
As to myself, it was determined that I should be set adrift in a small
canoe, with paddles and a sail, and four days' provisions; which last,
the Japanese captain was so kind to double out of his own stores, and
would permit no man to search me.  I got down into the canoe, while the
Dutchman, standing upon the deck, loaded me with all the curses and
injurious terms his language could afford.

About an hour before we saw the pirates I had taken an observation, and
found we were in the latitude of 46 N. and longitude of 183.  When I was
at some distance from the pirates, I discovered, by my pocket-glass,
several islands to the south-east.  I set up my sail, the wind being
fair, with a design to reach the nearest of those islands, which I made a
shift to do, in about three hours.  It was all rocky: however I got many
birds' eggs; and, striking fire, I kindled some heath and dry sea-weed,
by which I roasted my eggs.  I ate no other supper, being resolved to
spare my provisions as much as I could.  I passed the night under the
shelter of a rock, strewing some heath under me, and slept pretty well.


