In the mean time the emperor held frequent councils, to debate what
course should be taken with me; and I was afterwards assured by a
particular friend, a person of great quality, who was as much in the
secret as any, that the court was under many difficulties concerning me.
They apprehended my breaking loose; that my diet would be very expensive,
and might cause a famine.  Sometimes they determined to starve me; or at
least to shoot me in the face and hands with poisoned arrows, which would
soon despatch me; but again they considered, that the stench of so large
a carcass might produce a plague in the metropolis, and probably spread
through the whole kingdom.  In the midst of these consultations, several
officers of the army went to the door of the great council-chamber, and
two of them being admitted, gave an account of my behaviour to the six
criminals above-mentioned; which made so favourable an impression in the
breast of his majesty and the whole board, in my behalf, that an imperial
commission was issued out, obliging all the villages, nine hundred yards
round the city, to deliver in every morning six beeves, forty sheep, and
other victuals for my sustenance; together with a proportionable quantity
of bread, and wine, and other liquors; for the due payment of which, his
majesty gave assignments upon his treasury:—for this prince lives chiefly
upon his own demesnes; seldom, except upon great occasions, raising any
subsidies upon his subjects, who are bound to attend him in his wars at
their own expense.  An establishment was also made of six hundred persons
to be my domestics, who had board-wages allowed for their maintenance,
and tents built for them very conveniently on each side of my door.  It
was likewise ordered, that three hundred tailors should make me a suit of
clothes, after the fashion of the country; that six of his majesty’s
greatest scholars should be employed to instruct me in their language;
and lastly, that the emperor’s horses, and those of the nobility and
troops of guards, should be frequently exercised in my sight, to accustom
themselves to me.  All these orders were duly put in execution; and in
about three weeks I made a great progress in learning their language;
during which time the emperor frequently honoured me with his visits, and
was pleased to assist my masters in teaching me.  We began already to
converse together in some sort; and the first words I learnt, were to
express my desire "that he would please give me my liberty;" which I
every day repeated on my knees.  His answer, as I could comprehend it,
was, "that this must be a work of time, not to be thought on without the
advice of his council, and that first I must _lumos kelmin pesso desmar
lon emposo_;" that is, swear a peace with him and his kingdom.  However,
that I should be used with all kindness.  And he advised me to "acquire,
by my patience and discreet behaviour, the good opinion of himself and
his subjects."  He desired "I would not take it ill, if he gave orders to
certain proper officers to search me; for probably I might carry about me
several weapons, which must needs be dangerous things, if they answered
the bulk of so prodigious a person."  I said, "His majesty should be
satisfied; for I was ready to strip myself, and turn up my pockets before
him."  This I delivered part in words, and part in signs.  He replied,
"that, by the laws of the kingdom, I must be searched by two of his
officers; that he knew this could not be done without my consent and
assistance; and he had so good an opinion of my generosity and justice,
as to trust their persons in my hands; that whatever they took from me,
should be returned when I left the country, or paid for at the rate which
I would set upon them."  I took up the two officers in my hands, put them
first into my coat-pockets, and then into every other pocket about me,
except my two fobs, and another secret pocket, which I had no mind should
be searched, wherein I had some little necessaries that were of no
consequence to any but myself.  In one of my fobs there was a silver
watch, and in the other a small quantity of gold in a purse.  These
gentlemen, having pen, ink, and paper, about them, made an exact
inventory of every thing they saw; and when they had done, desired I
would set them down, that they might deliver it to the emperor.  This
inventory I afterwards translated into English, and is, word for word, as
follows:

    "_Imprimis_: In the right coat-pocket of the great man-mountain" (for
    so I interpret the words _quinbus flestrin_,) "after the strictest
    search, we found only one great piece of coarse-cloth, large enough
    to be a foot-cloth for your majesty’s chief room of state.  In the
    left pocket we saw a huge silver chest, with a cover of the same
    metal, which we, the searchers, were not able to lift.  We desired it
    should be opened, and one of us stepping into it, found himself up to
    the mid leg in a sort of dust, some part whereof flying up to our
    faces set us both a sneezing for several times together.  In his
    right waistcoat-pocket we found a prodigious bundle of white thin
    substances, folded one over another, about the bigness of three men,
    tied with a strong cable, and marked with black figures; which we
    humbly conceive to be writings, every letter almost half as large as
    the palm of our hands.  In the left there was a sort of engine, from
    the back of which were extended twenty long poles, resembling the
    pallisados before your majesty’s court: wherewith we conjecture the
    man-mountain combs his head; for we did not always trouble him with
    questions, because we found it a great difficulty to make him
    understand us.  In the large pocket, on the right side of his middle
    cover" (so I translate the word _ranfulo_, by which they meant my
    breeches,) "we saw a hollow pillar of iron, about the length of a
    man, fastened to a strong piece of timber larger than the pillar; and
    upon one side of the pillar, were huge pieces of iron sticking out,
    cut into strange figures, which we know not what to make of.  In the
    left pocket, another engine of the same kind.  In the smaller pocket
    on the right side, were several round flat pieces of white and red
    metal, of different bulk; some of the white, which seemed to be
    silver, were so large and heavy, that my comrade and I could hardly
    lift them.  In the left pocket were two black pillars irregularly
    shaped: we could not, without difficulty, reach the top of them, as
    we stood at the bottom of his pocket.  One of them was covered, and
    seemed all of a piece: but at the upper end of the other there
    appeared a white round substance, about twice the bigness of our
    heads.  Within each of these was enclosed a prodigious plate of
    steel; which, by our orders, we obliged him to show us, because we
    apprehended they might be dangerous engines.  He took them out of
    their cases, and told us, that in his own country his practice was to
    shave his beard with one of these, and cut his meat with the other.
    There were two pockets which we could not enter: these he called his
    fobs; they were two large slits cut into the top of his middle cover,
    but squeezed close by the pressure of his belly.  Out of the right
    fob hung a great silver chain, with a wonderful kind of engine at the
    bottom.  We directed him to draw out whatever was at the end of that
    chain; which appeared to be a globe, half silver, and half of some
    transparent metal; for, on the transparent side, we saw certain
    strange figures circularly drawn, and thought we could touch them,
    till we found our fingers stopped by the lucid substance.  He put
    this engine into our ears, which made an incessant noise, like that
    of a water-mill: and we conjecture it is either some unknown animal,
    or the god that he worships; but we are more inclined to the latter
    opinion, because he assured us, (if we understood him right, for he
    expressed himself very imperfectly) that he seldom did any thing
    without consulting it.  He called it his oracle, and said, it pointed
    out the time for every action of his life.  From the left fob he took
    out a net almost large enough for a fisherman, but contrived to open
    and shut like a purse, and served him for the same use: we found
    therein several massy pieces of yellow metal, which, if they be real
    gold, must be of immense value.

