"Devil-god," cried Bukawai, "I am the great witch-doctor.  My medicine
is strong.  Yours is weak.  If it is not, why do you stay tied here
like a goat that is bait for lions?"

Tarzan understood nothing the witch-doctor said, therefore he did not
reply, but only stared straight at Bukawai with cold and level gaze.
The hyenas crept up behind him.  He heard them growl; but he did not
even turn his head.  He was a beast with a man's brain.  The beast in
him refused to show fear in the face of a death which the man-mind
already admitted to be inevitable.

Bukawai, not yet ready to give his victim to the beasts, rushed upon
the hyenas with his knob-stick. There was a short scrimmage in which
the brutes came off second best, as they always did.  Tarzan watched
it.  He saw and realized the hatred which existed between the two
animals and the hideous semblance of a man.

With the hyenas subdued, Bukawai returned to the baiting of Tarzan; but
finding that the ape-man understood nothing he said, the witch-doctor
finally desisted.  Then he withdrew into the corridor and pulled the
latticework barrier across the opening.  He went back into the cave and
got a sleeping mat, which he brought to the opening, that he might lie
down and watch the spectacle of his revenge in comfort.

The hyenas were sneaking furtively around the ape-man.  Tarzan strained
at his bonds for a moment, but soon realized that the rope he had
braided to hold Numa, the lion, would hold him quite as successfully.
He did not wish to die; but he could look death in the face now as he
had many times before without a quaver.

As he pulled upon the rope he felt it rub against the small tree about
which it was passed.  Like a flash of the cinematograph upon the
screen, a picture was flashed before his mind's eye from the storehouse
of his memory.  He saw a lithe, boyish figure swinging high above the
ground at the end of a rope.  He saw many apes watching from below, and
then he saw the rope part and the boy hurtle downward toward the
ground.  Tarzan smiled.  Immediately he commenced to draw the rope
rapidly back and forth across the tree trunk.

The hyenas, gaining courage, came closer.  They sniffed at his legs;
but when he struck at them with his free arms they slunk off.  He knew
that with the growth of hunger they would attack.  Coolly,
methodically, without haste, Tarzan drew the rope back and forth
against the rough trunk of the small tree.

In the entrance to the cavern Bukawai fell asleep.  He thought it would
be some time before the beasts gained sufficient courage or hunger to
attack the captive.  Their growls and the cries of the victim would
awaken him.  In the meantime he might as well rest, and he did.

Thus the day wore on, for the hyenas were not famished, and the rope
with which Tarzan was bound was a stronger one than that of his
boyhood, which had parted so quickly to the chafing of the rough tree
bark.  Yet, all the while hunger was growing upon the beasts and the
strands of the grass rope were wearing thinner and thinner.  Bukawai
slept.

It was late afternoon before one of the beasts, irritated by the
gnawing of appetite, made a quick, growling dash at the ape-man. The
noise awoke Bukawai.  He sat up quickly and watched what went on within
the crater.  He saw the hungry hyena charge the man, leaping for the
unprotected throat.  He saw Tarzan reach out and seize the growling
animal, and then he saw the second beast spring for the devil-god's
shoulder.  There was a mighty heave of the great, smooth-skinned body.
Rounded muscles shot into great, tensed piles beneath the brown
hide--the ape-man surged forward with all his weight and all his great
strength--the bonds parted, and the three were rolling upon the floor
of the crater snarling, snapping, and rending.

Bukawai leaped to his feet.  Could it be that the devil-god was to
prevail against his servants? Impossible! The creature was unarmed, and
he was down with two hyenas on top of him; but Bukawai did not know
Tarzan.

The ape-man fastened his fingers upon the throat of one of the hyenas
and rose to one knee, though the other beast tore at him frantically in
an effort to pull him down.  With a single hand Tarzan held the one,
and with the other hand he reached forth and pulled toward him the
second beast.

And then Bukawai, seeing the battle going against his forces, rushed
forward from the cavern brandishing his knob-stick.  Tarzan saw him
coming, and rising now to both feet, a hyena in each hand, he hurled
one of the foaming beasts straight at the witch-doctor's head.  Down
went the two in a snarling, biting heap.  Tarzan tossed the second
hyena across the crater, while the first gnawed at the rotting face of
its master; but this did not suit the ape-man.  With a kick he sent the
beast howling after its companion, and springing to the side of the
prostrate witch-doctor, dragged him to his feet.

Bukawai, still conscious, saw death, immediate and terrible, in the
cold eyes of his captor, so he turned upon Tarzan with teeth and nails.
The ape-man shuddered at the proximity of that raw face to his.  The
hyenas had had enough and disappeared through the small aperture
leading into the cave.  Tarzan had little difficulty in overpowering
and binding Bukawai.  Then he led him to the very tree to which he had
been bound; but in binding Bukawai, Tarzan saw to it that escape after
the same fashion that he had escaped would be out of the question; then
he left him.

As he passed through the winding corridors and the subterranean
apartments, Tarzan saw nothing of the hyenas.

"They will return," he said to himself.

In the crater between the towering walls Bukawai, cold with terror,
trembled, trembled as with ague.

"They will return!" he cried, his voice rising to a fright-filled
shriek.

And they did.


