Thus it was an imposing word which Tarzan made of GOD.  The masculine
prefix of the apes is BU, the feminine MU; g Tarzan had named LA, o he
pronounced TU, and d was MO. So the word God evolved itself into
BULAMUTUMUMO, or, in English, he-g-she-o-she-d.

Similarly he had arrived at a strange and wonderful spelling of his own
name.  Tarzan is derived from the two ape words TAR and ZAN, meaning
white skin.  It was given him by his foster mother, Kala, the great
she-ape. When Tarzan first put it into the written language of his own
people he had not yet chanced upon either WHITE or SKIN in the
dictionary; but in a primer he had seen the picture of a little white
boy and so he wrote his name BUMUDE-MUTOMURO, or he-boy.

To follow Tarzan's strange system of spelling would be laborious as
well as futile, and so we shall in the future, as we have in the past,
adhere to the more familiar forms of our grammar school copybooks.  It
would tire you to remember that DO meant b, TU o, and RO y, and that to
say he-boy you must prefix the ape masculine gender sound BU before the
entire word and the feminine gender sound MU before each of the
lower-case letters which go to make up boy--it would tire you and it
would bring me to the nineteenth hole several strokes under par.

And so Tarzan harangued the moon, and when Goro did not reply, Tarzan
of the Apes waxed wroth.  He swelled his giant chest and bared his
fighting fangs, and hurled into the teeth of the dead satellite the
challenge of the bull ape.

"You are not Bulamutumumo," he cried.  "You are not king of the jungle
folk.  You are not so great as Tarzan, mighty fighter, mighty hunter.
None there is so great as Tarzan.  If there be a Bulamutumumo, Tarzan
can kill him.  Come down, Goro, great coward, and fight with Tarzan.
Tarzan will kill you.  I am Tarzan, the killer."

But the moon made no answer to the boasting of the ape-man, and when a
cloud came and obscured her face, Tarzan thought that Goro was indeed
afraid, and was hiding from him, so he came down out of the trees and
awoke Numgo and told him how great was Tarzan--how he had frightened
Goro out of the sky and made him tremble.  Tarzan spoke of the moon as
HE, for all things large or awe inspiring are male to the ape folk.

Numgo was not much impressed; but he was very sleepy, so he told Tarzan
to go away and leave his betters alone.

"But where shall I find God?" insisted Tarzan.  "You are very old; if
there is a God you must have seen Him.  What does He look like? Where
does He live?"

"I am God," replied Numgo.  "Now sleep and disturb me no more."

Tarzan looked at Numgo steadily for several minutes, his shapely head
sank just a trifle between his great shoulders, his square chin shot
forward and his short upper lip drew back, exposing his white teeth.
Then, with a low growl he leaped upon the ape and buried his fangs in
the other's hairy shoulder, clutching the great neck in his mighty
fingers.  Twice he shook the old ape, then he released his tooth-hold.

"Are you God?" he demanded.

"No," wailed Numgo.  "I am only a poor, old ape.  Leave me alone.  Go
ask the Gomangani where God is.  They are hairless like yourself and
very wise, too.  They should know."

Tarzan released Numgo and turned away.  The suggestion that he consult
the blacks appealed to him, and though his relations with the people of
Mbonga, the chief, were the antithesis of friendly, he could at least
spy upon his hated enemies and discover if they had intercourse with
God.

So it was that Tarzan set forth through the trees toward the village of
the blacks, all excitement at the prospect of discovering the Supreme
Being, the Creator of all things.  As he traveled he reviewed,
mentally, his armament--the condition of his hunting knife, the number
of his arrows, the newness of the gut which strung his bow--he hefted
the war spear which had once been the pride of some black warrior of
Mbonga's tribe.

If he met God, Tarzan would be prepared.  One could never tell whether
a grass rope, a war spear, or a poisoned arrow would be most
efficacious against an unfamiliar foe.  Tarzan of the Apes was quite
content--if God wished to fight, the ape-man had no doubt as to the
outcome of the struggle.  There were many questions Tarzan wished to
put to the Creator of the Universe and so he hoped that God would not
prove a belligerent God; but his experience of life and the ways of
living things had taught him that any creature with the means for
offense and defense was quite likely to provoke attack if in the proper
mood.


