I would replace the destroyed instruments upon the bridge; every
officer and man should know when we crossed thirty.  But then I should
assert the spirit which dominated me, I should resist arrest, and
insist upon bringing my ship back across the dead line, remaining at my
post until we had reached New York.  Then I should make a full report,
and with it a demand upon public opinion that the dead lines be wiped
forever from the seas.

I knew that I was right.  I knew that no more loyal officer wore the
uniform of the navy.  I knew that I was a good officer and sailor, and
I didn't propose submitting to degradation and discharge because a lot
of old, preglacial fossils had declared over two hundred years before
that no man should cross thirty.

Even while these thoughts were passing through my mind I was busy with
the details of my duties.  I had seen to it that a sea anchor was
rigged, and even now the men had completed their task, and the
Coldwater was swinging around rapidly, her nose pointing once more into
the wind, and the frightful rolling consequent upon her wallowing in
the trough was happily diminishing.

It was then that Johnson came hurrying to the bridge.  One of his eyes
was swollen and already darkening, and his lip was cut and bleeding.
Without even the formality of a salute, he burst upon me, white with
fury.

"Lieutenant Alvarez attacked me!" he cried.  "I demand that he be
placed under arrest.  I found him in the act of destroying the reserve
instruments, and when I would have interfered to protect them he fell
upon me and beat me.  I demand that you arrest him!"

"You forget yourself, Mr. Johnson," I said.  "You are not in command of
the ship.  I deplore the action of Lieutenant Alvarez, but I cannot
expunge from my mind the loyalty and self-sacrificing friendship which
has prompted him to his acts.  Were I you, sir, I should profit by the
example he has set.  Further, Mr. Johnson, I intend retaining command
of the ship, even though she crosses thirty, and I shall demand
implicit obedience from every officer and man aboard until I am
properly relieved from duty by a superior officer in the port of New
York."

"You mean to say that you will cross thirty without submitting to
arrest?" he almost shouted.

"I do, sir," I replied.  "And now you may go below, and, when again you
find it necessary to address me, you will please be so good as to bear
in mind the fact that I am your commanding officer, and as such
entitled to a salute."

He flushed, hesitated a moment, and then, saluting, turned upon his
heel and left the bridge.  Shortly after, Alvarez appeared.  He was
pale, and seemed to have aged ten years in the few brief minutes since
I last had seen him.  Saluting, he told me very simply what he had
done, and asked that I place him under arrest.

I put my hand on his shoulder, and I guess that my voice trembled a
trifle as, while reproving him for his act, I made it plain to him that
my gratitude was no less potent a force than his loyalty to me.  Then
it was that I outlined to him my purpose to defy the regulation that
had raised the dead lines, and to take my ship back to New York myself.

I did not ask him to share the responsibility with me.  I merely stated
that I should refuse to submit to arrest, and that I should demand of
him and every other officer and man implicit obedience to my every
command until we docked at home.

His face brightened at my words, and he assured me that I would find
him as ready to acknowledge my command upon the wrong side of thirty as
upon the right, an assurance which I hastened to tell him I did not
need.

The storm continued to rage for three days, and as far as the wind
scarce varied a point during all that time, I knew that we must be far
beyond thirty, drifting rapidly east by south.  All this time it had
been impossible to work upon the damaged engines or the gravity-screen
generators; but we had a full set of instruments upon the bridge, for
Alvarez, after discovering my intentions, had fetched the reserve
instruments from his own cabin, where he had hidden them.  Those which
Johnson had seen him destroy had been a third set which only Alvarez
had known was aboard the Coldwater.

We waited impatiently for the sun, that we might determine our exact
location, and upon the fourth day our vigil was rewarded a few minutes
before noon.


