I turned to give her a reassuring smile as the lion indicated that he
had not seen us, and as I did so she, too, turned her face toward mine,
for the same purpose, doubtless.  Anyway, as our heads turned
simultaneously, our lips brushed together.  A startled expression came
into Victory's eyes as she drew back in evident confusion.

As for me, the strangest sensation that I have ever experienced claimed
me for an instant.  A peculiar, tingling thrill ran through my veins,
and my head swam.  I could not account for it.

Naturally, being a naval officer and consequently in the best society
of the federation, I have seen much of women.  With others, I have
laughed at the assertions of the savants that modern man is a cold and
passionless creation in comparison with the males of former ages--in a
word, that love, as the one grand passion, had ceased to exist.

I do not know, now, but that they were more nearly right than we have
guessed, at least in so far as modern civilized woman is concerned.  I
have kissed many women--young and beautiful and middle aged and old,
and many that I had no business kissing--but never before had I
experienced that remarkable and altogether delightful thrill that
followed the accidental brushing of my lips against the lips of Victory.

The occurrence interested me, and I was tempted to experiment further.
But when I would have essayed it another new and entirely unaccountable
force restrained me.  For the first time in my life I felt
embarrassment in the presence of a woman.

What further might have developed I cannot say, for at that moment a
perfect she-devil of a lioness, with keener eyes than her lord and
master, discovered us.  She came trotting toward our place of
concealment, growling and baring her yellow fangs.

I waited for an instant, hoping that I might be mistaken, and that she
would turn off in some other direction.  But no--she increased her trot
to a gallop, and then I fired at her, but the bullet, though it struck
her full in the breast, didn't stop her.

Screaming with pain and rage, the creature fairly flew toward us.
Behind her came other lions.  Our case looked hopeless.  We were upon
the brink of the river.  There seemed no avenue of escape, and I knew
that even my modern automatic rifle was inadequate in the face of so
many of these fierce beasts.

To remain where we were would have been suicidal.  We were both
standing now, Victory keeping her place bravely at my side, when I
reached the only decision open to me.

Seizing the girl's hand, I turned, just as the lioness crashed into the
opposite side of the bushes, and, dragging Victory after me, leaped
over the edge of the bank into the river.

I did not know that lions are not fond of water, nor did I know if
Victory could swim, but death, immediate and terrible, stared us in the
face if we remained, and so I took the chance.

At this point the current ran close to the shore, so that we were
immediately in deep water, and, to my intense satisfaction, Victory
struck out with a strong, overhand stroke and set all my fears on her
account at rest.

But my relief was short-lived.  That lioness, as I have said before,
was a veritable devil.  She stood for a moment glaring at us, then like
a shot she sprang into the river and swam swiftly after us.

Victory was a length ahead of me.

"Swim for the other shore!" I called to her.

I was much impeded by my rifle, having to swim with one hand while I
clung to my precious weapon with the other.  The girl had seen the
lioness take to the water, and she had also seen that I was swimming
much more slowly than she, and what did she do?  She started to drop
back to my side.

"Go on!" I cried.  "Make for the other shore, and then follow down
until you find my friends.  Tell them that I sent you, and with orders
that they are to protect you.  Go on!  Go on!"

But she only waited until we were again swimming side by side, and I
saw that she had drawn her long knife, and was holding it between her
teeth.

"Do as I tell you!" I said to her sharply, but she shook her head.

The lioness was overhauling us rapidly.  She was swimming silently, her
chin just touching the water, but blood was streaming from between her
lips.  It was evident that her lungs were pierced.

She was almost upon me.  I saw that in a moment she would take me under
her forepaws, or seize me in those great jaws.  I felt that my time had
come, but I meant to die fighting.  And so I turned, and, treading
water, raised my rifle above my head and awaited her.


