It was the call of the stomach--the most compelling and insistent call
which the jungle knows--that took Tarzan finally back to the trees and
off in search of food, while Tantor continued his interrupted journey
in the opposite direction.

For an hour the ape-man foraged.  A lofty nest yielded its fresh, warm
harvest.  Fruits, berries, and tender plantain found a place upon his
menu in the order that he happened upon them, for he did not seek such
foods.  Meat, meat, meat! It was always meat that Tarzan of the Apes
hunted; but sometimes meat eluded him, as today.

And as he roamed the jungle his active mind busied itself not alone
with his hunting, but with many other subjects.  He had a habit of
recalling often the events of the preceding days and hours.  He lived
over his visit with Tantor; he cogitated upon the digging blacks and
the strange, covered pit they had left behind them.  He wondered again
and again what its purpose might be.  He compared perceptions and
arrived at judgments.  He compared judgments, reaching conclusions--not
always correct ones, it is true, but at least he used his brain for the
purpose God intended it, which was the less difficult because he was
not handicapped by the second-hand, and usually erroneous, judgment of
others.

And as he puzzled over the covered pit, there loomed suddenly before
his mental vision a huge, gray-black bulk which lumbered ponderously
along a jungle trail.  Instantly Tarzan tensed to the shock of a sudden
fear.  Decision and action usually occurred simultaneously in the life
of the ape-man, and now he was away through the leafy branches ere the
realization of the pit's purpose had scarce formed in his mind.

Swinging from swaying limb to swaying limb, he raced through the middle
terraces where the trees grew close together.  Again he dropped to the
ground and sped, silently and light of foot, over the carpet of
decaying vegetation, only to leap again into the trees where the
tangled undergrowth precluded rapid advance upon the surface.

In his anxiety he cast discretion to the winds.  The caution of the
beast was lost in the loyalty of the man, and so it came that he
entered a large clearing, denuded of trees, without a thought of what
might lie there or upon the farther edge to dispute the way with him.

He was half way across when directly in his path and but a few yards
away there rose from a clump of tall grasses a half dozen chattering
birds.  Instantly Tarzan turned aside, for he knew well enough what
manner of creature the presence of these little sentinels proclaimed.
Simultaneously Buto, the rhinoceros, scrambled to his short legs and
charged furiously.  Haphazard charges Buto, the rhinoceros.  With his
weak eyes he sees but poorly even at short distances, and whether his
erratic rushes are due to the panic of fear as he attempts to escape,
or to the irascible temper with which he is generally credited, it is
difficult to determine.  Nor is the matter of little moment to one whom
Buto charges, for if he be caught and tossed, the chances are that
naught will interest him thereafter.

And today it chanced that Buto bore down straight upon Tarzan, across
the few yards of knee-deep grass which separated them.  Accident
started him in the direction of the ape-man, and then his weak eyes
discerned the enemy, and with a series of snorts he charged straight
for him.  The little rhino birds fluttered and circled about their
giant ward.  Among the branches of the trees at the edge of the
clearing, a score or more monkeys chattered and scolded as the loud
snorts of the angry beast sent them scurrying affrightedly to the upper
terraces.  Tarzan alone appeared indifferent and serene.

Directly in the path of the charge he stood.  There had been no time to
seek safety in the trees beyond the clearing, nor had Tarzan any mind
to delay his journey because of Buto.  He had met the stupid beast
before and held him in fine contempt.

And now Buto was upon him, the massive head lowered and the long, heavy
horn inclined for the frightful work for which nature had designed it;
but as he struck upward, his weapon raked only thin air, for the
ape-man had sprung lightly aloft with a catlike leap that carried him
above the threatening horn to the broad back of the rhinoceros.
Another spring and he was on the ground behind the brute and racing
like a deer for the trees.

Buto, angered and mystified by the strange disappearance of his prey,
wheeled and charged frantically in another direction, which chanced to
be not the direction of Tarzan's flight, and so the ape-man came in
safety to the trees and continued on his swift way through the forest.

Some distance ahead of him Tantor moved steadily along the well-worn
elephant trail, and ahead of Tantor a crouching, black warrior listened
intently in the middle of the path.  Presently he heard the sound for
which he had been hoping--the cracking, snapping sound which heralded
the approach of an elephant.

To his right and left in other parts of the jungle other warriors were
watching.  A low signal, passed from one to another, apprised the most
distant that the quarry was afoot.  Rapidly they converged toward the
trail, taking positions in trees down wind from the point at which
Tantor must pass them.  Silently they waited and presently were
rewarded by the sight of a mighty tusker carrying an amount of ivory in
his long tusks that set their greedy hearts to palpitating.

No sooner had he passed their positions than the warriors clambered
from their perches.  No longer were they silent, but instead clapped
their hands and shouted as they reached the ground.  For an instant
Tantor, the elephant, paused with upraised trunk and tail, with great
ears up-pricked, and then he swung on along the trail at a rapid,
shuffling pace--straight toward the covered pit with its sharpened
stakes upstanding in the ground.

Behind him came the yelling warriors, urging him on in the rapid flight
which would not permit a careful examination of the ground before him.
Tantor, the elephant, who could have turned and scattered his
adversaries with a single charge, fled like a frightened deer--fled
toward a hideous, torturing death.


