Tara of Helium, as the night wore on and Turan did not return, became
more and more uneasy, and when dawn broke with no sign of him she
guessed that he had failed. Something more than her own unhappy
predicament brought a feeling of sorrow to her heart--of sorrow and
loneliness. She realized now how she had come to depend upon this
panthan not only for protection but for companionship as well. She
missed him, and in missing him realized suddenly that he had meant more
to her than a mere hired warrior. It was as though a friend had been
taken from her--an old and valued friend. She rose from her place of
concealment that she might have a better view of the city.

U-Dor, dwar of the 8th Utan of O-Tar, Jeddak of Manator, rode back in
the early dawn toward Manator from a brief excursion to a neighboring
village. As he was rounding the hills south of the city, his keen eyes
were attracted by a slight movement among the shrubbery close to the
summit of the nearest hill. He halted his vicious mount and watched
more closely. He saw a figure rise facing away from him and peer down
toward Manator beyond the hill.

"Come!" he signalled to his followers, and with a word to this thoat
turned the beast at a rapid gallop up the hillside. In his wake swept
his twenty savage warriors, the padded feet of their mounts soundless
upon the soft turf. It was the rattle of sidearms and harness that
brought Tara of Helium suddenly about, facing them. She saw a score of
warriors with couched lances bearing down upon her.

She glanced at Ghek. What would the spiderman do in this emergency? She
saw him crawl to his rykor and attach himself. Then he arose, the
beautiful body once again animated and alert. She thought that the
creature was preparing for flight. Well, it made little difference to
her. Against such as were streaming up the hill toward them a single
mediocre swordsman such as Ghek was worse than no defense at all.

"Hurry, Ghek!" she admonished him. "Back into the hills! You may find
there a hiding-place;" but the creature only stepped between her and
the oncoming riders, drawing his long-sword.

"It is useless, Ghek," she said, when she saw that he intended to
defend her. "What can a single sword accomplish against such odds?"

"I can die but once," replied the kaldane. "You and your panthan saved
me from Luud and I but do what your panthan would do were he here to
protect you."

"It is brave, but it is useless," she replied. "Sheathe your sword.
They may not intend us harm."

Ghek let the point of his weapon drop to the ground, but he did not
sheathe it, and thus the two stood waiting as U-Dor the dwar stopped
his thoat before them while his twenty warriors formed a rough circle
about. For a long minute U-Dor sat his mount in silence, looking
searchingly first at Tara of Helium and then at her hideous companion.

"What manner of creature are you?" he asked presently. "And what do you
before the gates of Manator?"

"We are from far countries," replied the girl, "and we are lost and
starving. We ask only food and rest and the privilege to go our way
seeking our own homes."

U-Dor smiled a grim smile. "Manator and the hills which guard it alone
know the age of Manator," he said; "yet in all the ages that have
rolled by since Manator first was, there be no record in the annals of
Manator of a stranger departing from Manator."

"But I am a princess," cried the girl haughtily, "and my country is not
at war with yours. You must give me and my companions aid and assist us
to return to our own land. It is the law of Barsoom."

"Manator knows only the laws of Manator," replied U-Dor; "but come. You
shall go with us to the city, where you, being beautiful, need have no
fear. I, myself, will protect you if O-Tar so decrees. And as for your
companion--but hold! You said 'companions'--there are others of your
party then?"

"You see what you see," replied Tara haughtily.

"Be that as it may," said U-Dor. "If there be more they shall not
escape Manator; but as I was saying, if your companion fights well he
too may live, for O-Tar is just, and just are the laws of Manator.
Come!"

Ghek demurred.

"It is useless," said the girl, seeing that he would have stood his
ground and fought them. "Let us go with them. Why pit your puny blade
against their mighty ones when there should lie in your great brain the
means to outwit them?" She spoke in a low whisper, rapidly.

"You are right, Tara of Helium," he replied and sheathed his sword.

And so they moved down the hillside toward the gates of Manator--Tara,
Princess of Helium, and Ghek, the kaldane of Bantoom--and surrounding
them rode the savage, painted warriors of U-Dor, dwar of the 8th Utan
of O-Tar, Jeddak of Manator.



