Then the party rose, and dragging me to the crumbling arch, made me
fast to a huge, corroded, copper ring which was dangling from an
eyebolt imbedded in the masonry.

None of them, not even Buckingham, seemed to feel any personal
animosity toward me.  They were naturally rough and brutal, as
primitive men are supposed to have been since the dawn of humanity, but
they did not go out of their way to maltreat me.

With the coming of dawn the number of lions about us seemed to have
greatly diminished--at least they made less noise--and as Buckingham
and his party disappeared into the woods, leaving me alone to my
terrible fate, I could hear the grumblings and growlings of the beasts
diminishing with the sound of the chant, which the party still
continued.  It appeared that the lions had failed to note that I had
been left for their breakfast, and had followed off after their
worshippers instead.

But I knew the reprieve would be but for a short time, and though I had
no wish to die, I must confess that I rather wished the ordeal over and
the peace of oblivion upon me.

The voices of the men and the lions receded in the distance, until
finally quiet reigned about me, broken only by the sweet voices of
birds and the sighing of the summer wind in the trees.

It seemed impossible to believe that in this peaceful woodland setting
the frightful thing was to occur which must come with the passing of
the next lion who chanced within sight or smell of the crumbling arch.

I strove to tear myself loose from my bonds, but succeeded only in
tightening them about my arms.  Then I remained passive for a long
time, letting the scenes of my lifetime pass in review before my mind's
eye.

I tried to imagine the astonishment, incredulity, and horror with which
my family and friends would be overwhelmed if, for an instant, space
could be annihilated and they could see me at the gates of London.

The gates of London!  Where was the multitude hurrying to the marts of
trade after a night of pleasure or rest?  Where was the clang of
tramcar gongs, the screech of motor horns, the vast murmur of a dense
throng?

Where were they?  And as I asked the question a lone, gaunt lion strode
from the tangled jungle upon the far side of the clearing.
Majestically and noiselessly upon his padded feet the king of beasts
moved slowly toward the gates of London and toward me.

Was I afraid?  I fear that I was almost afraid.  I know that I thought
that fear was coming to me, and so I straightened up and squared my
shoulders and looked the lion straight in the eyes--and waited.

It is not a nice way to die--alone, with one's hands fast bound,
beneath the fangs and talons of a beast of prey.  No, it is not a nice
way to die, not a pretty way.

The lion was halfway across the clearing when I heard a slight sound
behind me.  The great cat stopped in his tracks.  He lashed his tail
against his sides now, instead of simply twitching its tip, and his low
moan became a thunderous roar.

As I craned my neck to catch a glimpse of the thing that had aroused
the fury of the beast before me, it sprang through the arched gateway
and was at my side--with parted lips and heaving bosom and disheveled
hair--a bronzed and lovely vision to eyes that had never harbored hope
of rescue.

It was Victory, and in her arms she clutched my rifle and revolver.  A
long knife was in the doeskin belt that supported the doeskin skirt
tightly about her lithe limbs.  She dropped my weapons at my feet, and,
snatching the knife from its resting place, severed the bonds that held
me.  I was free, and the lion was preparing to charge.

"Run!" I cried to the girl, as I bent and seized my rifle.  But she
only stood there at my side, her bared blade ready in her hand.

The lion was bounding toward us now in prodigious leaps.  I raised the
rifle and fired.  It was a lucky shot, for I had no time to aim
carefully, and when the beast crumpled and rolled, lifeless, to the
ground, I went upon my knees and gave thanks to the God of my ancestors.

And, still upon my knees, I turned, and taking the girl's hand in mine,
I kissed it.  She smiled at that, and laid her other hand upon my head.

"You have strange customs in your country," she said.

I could not but smile at that when I thought how strange it would seem
to my countrymen could they but see me kneeling there on the site of
London, kissing the hand of England's queen.

"And now," I said, as I rose, "you must return to the safety of your
camp.  I will go with you until you are near enough to continue alone
in safety.  Then I shall try to return to my comrades."

"I will not return to the camp," she replied.

"But what shall you do?" I asked.


