"I hate you," she said, and then, as I was about to beg for a fair
hearing she pointed over my shoulder.  "The thipdar comes," she said,
and I turned again to meet the reptile.

So this was a thipdar.  I might have known it.  The cruel bloodhound of
the Mahars.  The long-extinct pterodactyl of the outer world.  But this
time I met it with a weapon it never had faced before.  I had selected
my longest arrow, and with all my strength had bent the bow until the
very tip of the shaft rested upon the thumb of my left hand, and then
as the great creature darted toward us I let drive straight for that
tough breast.

Hissing like the escape valve of a steam engine, the mighty creature
fell turning and twisting into the sea below, my arrow buried
completely in its carcass.  I turned toward the girl.  She was looking
past me.  It was evident that she had seen the thipdar die.

"Dian," I said, "won't you tell me that you are not sorry that I have
found you?"

"I hate you," was her only reply; but I imagined that there was less
vehemence in it than before--yet it might have been but my imagination.

"Why do you hate me, Dian?" I asked, but she did not answer me.

"What are you doing here?" I asked, "and what has happened to you since
Hooja freed you from the Sagoths?"

At first I thought that she was going to ignore me entirely, but
finally she thought better of it.

"I was again running away from Jubal the Ugly One," she said.  "After I
escaped from the Sagoths I made my way alone back to my own land; but
on account of Jubal I did not dare enter the villages or let any of my
friends know that I had returned for fear that Jubal might find out.
By watching for a long time I found that my brother had not yet
returned, and so I continued to live in a cave beside a valley which my
race seldom frequents, awaiting the time that he should come back and
free me from Jubal.

"But at last one of Jubal's hunters saw me as I was creeping toward my
father's cave to see if my brother had yet returned and he gave the
alarm and Jubal set out after me.  He has been pursuing me across many
lands.  He cannot be far behind me now.  When he comes he will kill you
and carry me back to his cave.  He is a terrible man.  I have gone as
far as I can go, and there is no escape," and she looked hopelessly up
at the continuation of the ledge twenty feet above us.

"But he shall not have me," she suddenly cried, with great vehemence.
"The sea is there"--she pointed over the edge of the cliff--"and the
sea shall have me rather than Jubal."

"But I have you now Dian," I cried; "nor shall Jubal, nor any other
have you, for you are mine," and I seized her hand, nor did I lift it
above her head and let it fall in token of release.

She had risen to her feet, and was looking straight into my eyes with
level gaze.

"I do not believe you," she said, "for if you meant it you would have
done this when the others were present to witness it--then I should
truly have been your mate; now there is no one to see you do it, for
you know that without witnesses your act does not bind you to me," and
she withdrew her hand from mine and turned away.

I tried to convince her that I was sincere, but she simply couldn't
forget the humiliation that I had put upon her on that other occasion.

"If you mean all that you say you will have ample chance to prove it,"
she said, "if Jubal does not catch and kill you.  I am in your power,
and the treatment you accord me will be the best proof of your
intentions toward me.  I am not your mate, and again I tell you that I
hate you, and that I should be glad if I never saw you again."

Dian certainly was candid.  There was no gainsaying that.  In fact I
found candor and directness to be quite a marked characteristic of the
cave men of Pellucidar.  Finally I suggested that we make some attempt
to gain my cave, where we might escape the searching Jubal, for I am
free to admit that I had no considerable desire to meet the formidable
and ferocious creature, of whose mighty prowess Dian had told me when I
first met her.  He it was who, armed with a puny knife, had met and
killed a cave bear in a hand-to-hand struggle.  It was Jubal who could
cast his spear entirely through the armored carcass of the sadok at
fifty paces.  It was he who had crushed the skull of a charging dyryth
with a single blow of his war club.  No, I was not pining to meet the
Ugly One-and it was quite certain that I should not go out and hunt for
him; but the matter was taken out of my hands very quickly, as is often
the way, and I did meet Jubal the Ugly One face to face.

This is how it happened.  I had led Dian back along the ledge the way
she had come, searching for a path that would lead us to the top of the
cliff, for I knew that we could then cross over to the edge of my own
little valley, where I felt certain we should find a means of ingress
from the cliff top.  As we proceeded along the ledge I gave Dian minute
directions for finding my cave against the chance of something
happening to me.  I knew that she would be quite safely hidden away
from pursuit once she gained the shelter of my lair, and the valley
would afford her ample means of sustenance.

Also, I was very much piqued by her treatment of me.  My heart was sad
and heavy, and I wanted to make her feel badly by suggesting that
something terrible might happen to me--that I might, in fact, be
killed.  But it didn't work worth a cent, at least as far as I could
perceive.  Dian simply shrugged those magnificent shoulders of hers,
and murmured something to the effect that one was not rid of trouble so
easily as that.

For a while I kept still.  I was utterly squelched.  And to think that
I had twice protected her from attack--the last time risking my life to
save hers.  It was incredible that even a daughter of the Stone Age
could be so ungrateful--so heartless; but maybe her heart partook of
the qualities of her epoch.

Presently we found a rift in the cliff which had been widened and
extended by the action of the water draining through it from the
plateau above.  It gave us a rather rough climb to the summit, but
finally we stood upon the level mesa which stretched back for several
miles to the mountain range.  Behind us lay the broad inland sea,
curving upward in the horizonless distance to merge into the blue of
the sky, so that for all the world it looked as though the sea lapped
back to arch completely over us and disappear beyond the distant
mountains at our backs--the weird and uncanny aspect of the seascapes
of Pellucidar balk description.


