Once at a safe distance from the despoiled mother and out of earshot of
her screams and menaces, Tarzan paused to inspect his prize, now so
thoroughly terrorized that he had ceased his struggles and his outcries.

The frightened child rolled his eyes fearfully toward his captor, until
the whites showed gleaming all about the irises.

"I am Tarzan," said the ape-man, in the vernacular of the anthropoids.
"I will not harm you.  You are to be Tarzan's balu.  Tarzan will
protect you.  He will feed you.  The best in the jungle shall be for
Tarzan's balu, for Tarzan is a mighty hunter.  None need you fear, not
even Numa, the lion, for Tarzan is a mighty fighter.  None so great as
Tarzan, son of Kala.  Do not fear."

But the child only whimpered and trembled, for he did not understand
the tongue of the great apes, and the voice of Tarzan sounded to him
like the barking and growling of a beast.  Then, too, he had heard
stories of this bad, white forest god.  It was he who had slain Kulonga
and others of the warriors of Mbonga, the chief.  It was he who entered
the village stealthily, by magic, in the darkness of the night, to
steal arrows and poison, and frighten the women and the children and
even the great warriors.  Doubtless this wicked god fed upon little
boys.  Had his mother not said as much when he was naughty and she
threatened to give him to the white god of the jungle if he were not
good? Little black Tibo shook as with ague.

"Are you cold, Go-bu-balu?" asked Tarzan, using the simian equivalent
of black he-baby in lieu of a better name.  "The sun is hot; why do you
shiver?"

Tibo could not understand; but he cried for his mamma and begged the
great, white god to let him go, promising always to be a good boy
thereafter if his plea were granted.  Tarzan shook his head.  Not a
word could he understand.  This would never do! He must teach
Go-bu-balu a language which sounded like talk.  It was quite certain to
Tarzan that Go-bu-balu's speech was not talk at all.  It sounded quite
as senseless as the chattering of the silly birds.  It would be best,
thought the ape-man, quickly to get him among the tribe of Kerchak
where he would hear the Mangani talking among themselves.  Thus he
would soon learn an intelligible form of speech.

Tarzan rose to his feet upon the swaying branch where he had halted far
above the ground, and motioned to the child to follow him; but Tibo
only clung tightly to the bole of the tree and wept.  Being a boy, and
a native African, he had, of course, climbed into trees many times
before this; but the idea of racing off through the forest, leaping
from one branch to another, as his captor, to his horror, had done when
he had carried Tibo away from his mother, filled his childish heart
with terror.

Tarzan sighed.  His newly acquired balu had much indeed to learn.  It
was pitiful that a balu of his size and strength should be so backward.
He tried to coax Tibo to follow him; but the child dared not, so Tarzan
picked him up and carried him upon his back.  Tibo no longer scratched
or bit.  Escape seemed impossible.  Even now, were he set upon the
ground, the chance was remote, he knew, that he could find his way back
to the village of Mbonga, the chief.  Even if he could, there were the
lions and the leopards and the hyenas, any one of which, as Tibo was
well aware, was particularly fond of the meat of little black boys.

So far the terrible white god of the jungle had offered him no harm.
He could not expect even this much consideration from the frightful,
green-eyed man-eaters.  It would be the lesser of two evils, then, to
let the white god carry him away without scratching and biting, as he
had done at first.

As Tarzan swung rapidly through the trees, little Tibo closed his eyes
in terror rather than look longer down into the frightful abysses
beneath.  Never before in all his life had Tibo been so frightened, yet
as the white giant sped on with him through the forest there stole over
the child an inexplicable sensation of security as he saw how true were
the leaps of the ape-man, how unerring his grasp upon the swaying limbs
which gave him hand-hold, and then, too, there was safety in the middle
terraces of the forest, far above the reach of the dreaded lions.

And so Tarzan came to the clearing where the tribe fed, dropping among
them with his new balu clinging tightly to his shoulders.  He was
fairly in the midst of them before Tibo spied a single one of the great
hairy forms, or before the apes realized that Tarzan was not alone.
When they saw the little Gomangani perched upon his back some of them
came forward in curiosity with upcurled lips and snarling mien.

An hour before little Tibo would have said that he knew the uttermost
depths of fear; but now, as he saw these fearsome beasts surrounding
him, he realized that all that had gone before was as nothing by
comparison.  Why did the great white giant stand there so
unconcernedly?  Why did he not flee before these horrid, hairy, tree
men fell upon them both and tore them to pieces? And then there came to
Tibo a numbing recollection.  It was none other than the story he had
heard passed from mouth to mouth, fearfully, by the people of Mbonga,
the chief, that this great white demon of the jungle was naught other
than a hairless ape, for had not he been seen in company with these?

Tibo could only stare in wide-eyed horror at the approaching apes.  He
saw their beetling brows, their great fangs, their wicked eyes.  He
noted their mighty muscles rolling beneath their shaggy hides.  Their
every attitude and expression was a menace.  Tarzan saw this, too.  He
drew Tibo around in front of him.

"This is Tarzan's Go-bu-balu," he said.  "Do not harm him, or Tarzan
will kill you," and he bared his own fangs in the teeth of the nearest
ape.

"It is a Gomangani," replied the ape.  "Let me kill it.  It is a
Gomangani.  The Gomangani are our enemies.  Let me kill it."

"Go away," snarled Tarzan.  "I tell you, Gunto, it is Tarzan's balu.
Go away or Tarzan will kill you," and the ape-man took a step toward
the advancing ape.

The latter sidled off, quite stiff and haughty, after the manner of a
dog which meets another and is too proud to fight and too fearful to
turn his back and run.

Next came Teeka, prompted by curiosity.  At her side skipped little
Gazan.  They were filled with wonder like the others; but Teeka did not
bare her fangs.  Tarzan saw this and motioned that she approach.

"Tarzan has a balu now," he said.  "He and Teeka's balu can play
together."

"It is a Gomangani," replied Teeka.  "It will kill my balu.  Take it
away, Tarzan."

Tarzan laughed.  "It could not harm Pamba, the rat," he said.  "It is
but a little balu and very frightened.  Let Gazan play with it."

Teeka still was fearful, for with all their mighty ferocity the great
anthropoids are timid; but at last, assured by her great confidence in
Tarzan, she pushed Gazan forward toward the little black boy.  The
small ape, guided by instinct, drew back toward its mother, baring its
small fangs and screaming in mingled fear and rage.

Tibo, too, showed no signs of desiring a closer acquaintance with
Gazan, so Tarzan gave up his efforts for the time.


