I had forgotten what little geology I had studied at school--about all
that remained was an impression of horror that the illustrations of
restored prehistoric monsters had made upon me, and a well-defined
belief that any man with a pig's shank and a vivid imagination could
"restore" most any sort of paleolithic monster he saw fit, and take
rank as a first class paleontologist.  But when I saw these sleek,
shiny carcasses shimmering in the sunlight as they emerged from the
ocean, shaking their giant heads; when I saw the waters roll from their
sinuous bodies in miniature waterfalls as they glided hither and
thither, now upon the surface, now half submerged; as I saw them meet,
open-mouthed, hissing and snorting, in their titanic and interminable
warring I realized how futile is man's poor, weak imagination by
comparison with Nature's incredible genius.

And Perry!  He was absolutely flabbergasted.  He said so himself.

"David," he remarked, after we had marched for a long time beside that
awful sea.  "David, I used to teach geology, and I thought that I
believed what I taught; but now I see that I did not believe it--that
it is impossible for man to believe such things as these unless he sees
them with his own eyes.  We take things for granted, perhaps, because
we are told them over and over again, and have no way of disproving
them--like religions, for example; but we don't believe them, we only
think we do.  If you ever get back to the outer world you will find
that the geologists and paleontologists will be the first to set you
down a liar, for they know that no such creatures as they restore ever
existed.  It is all right to IMAGINE them as existing in an equally
imaginary epoch--but now?  poof!"

At the next halt Hooja the Sly One managed to find enough slack chain
to permit him to worm himself back quite close to Dian.  We were all
standing, and as he edged near the girl she turned her back upon him in
such a truly earthly feminine manner that I could scarce repress a
smile; but it was a short-lived smile for on the instant the Sly One's
hand fell upon the girl's bare arm, jerking her roughly toward him.

I was not then familiar with the customs or social ethics which
prevailed within Pellucidar; but even so I did not need the appealing
look which the girl shot to me from her magnificent eyes to influence
my subsequent act.  What the Sly One's intention was I paused not to
inquire; but instead, before he could lay hold of her with his other
hand, I placed a right to the point of his jaw that felled him in his
tracks.

A roar of approval went up from those of the other prisoners and the
Sagoths who had witnessed the brief drama; not, as I later learned,
because I had championed the girl, but for the neat and, to them,
astounding method by which I had bested Hooja.

And the girl?  At first she looked at me with wide, wondering eyes, and
then she dropped her head, her face half averted, and a delicate flush
suffused her cheek.  For a moment she stood thus in silence, and then
her head went high, and she turned her back upon me as she had upon
Hooja.  Some of the prisoners laughed, and I saw the face of Ghak the
Hairy One go very black as he looked at me searchingly.  And what I
could see of Dian's cheek went suddenly from red to white.

Immediately after we resumed the march, and though I realized that in
some way I had offended Dian the Beautiful I could not prevail upon her
to talk with me that I might learn wherein I had erred--in fact I might
quite as well have been addressing a sphinx for all the attention I
got.  At last my own foolish pride stepped in and prevented my making
any further attempts, and thus a companionship that without my
realizing it had come to mean a great deal to me was cut off.
Thereafter I confined my conversation to Perry.  Hooja did not renew
his advances toward the girl, nor did he again venture near me.

Again the weary and apparently interminable marching became a perfect
nightmare of horrors to me.  The more firmly fixed became the
realization that the girl's friendship had meant so much to me, the
more I came to miss it; and the more impregnable the barrier of silly
pride.  But I was very young and would not ask Ghak for the explanation
which I was sure he could give, and that might have made everything all
right again.

On the march, or during halts, Dian refused consistently to notice
me--when her eyes wandered in my direction she looked either over my
head or directly through me.  At last I became desperate, and
determined to swallow my self-esteem, and again beg her to tell me how
I had offended, and how I might make reparation.  I made up my mind
that I should do this at the next halt.  We were approaching another
range of mountains at the time, and when we reached them, instead of
winding across them through some high-flung pass we entered a mighty
natural tunnel--a series of labyrinthine grottoes, dark as Erebus.

The guards had no torches or light of any description.  In fact we had
seen no artificial light or sign of fire since we had entered
Pellucidar.  In a land of perpetual noon there is no need of light
above ground, yet I marveled that they had no means of lighting their
way through these dark, subterranean passages.  So we crept along at a
snail's pace, with much stumbling and falling--the guards keeping up a
singsong chant ahead of us, interspersed with certain high notes which
I found always indicated rough places and turns.

Halts were now more frequent, but I did not wish to speak to Dian until
I could see from the expression of her face how she was receiving my
apologies.  At last a faint glow ahead forewarned us of the end of the
tunnel, for which I for one was devoutly thankful.  Then at a sudden
turn we emerged into the full light of the noonday sun.

But with it came a sudden realization of what meant to me a real
catastrophe--Dian was gone, and with her a half-dozen other prisoners.
The guards saw it too, and the ferocity of their rage was terrible to
behold.  Their awesome, bestial faces were contorted in the most
diabolical expressions, as they accused each other of responsibility
for the loss.  Finally they fell upon us, beating us with their spear
shafts, and hatchets.  They had already killed two near the head of the
line, and were like to have finished the balance of us when their
leader finally put a stop to the brutal slaughter.  Never in all my
life had I witnessed a more horrible exhibition of bestial rage--I
thanked God that Dian had not been one of those left to endure it.

Of the twelve prisoners who had been chained ahead of me each alternate
one had been freed commencing with Dian.  Hooja was gone.  Ghak
remained.  What could it mean?  How had it been accomplished?  The
commander of the guards was investigating.  Soon he discovered that the
rude locks which had held the neckbands in place had been deftly picked.


