I had stumbled to my feet the moment that I discovered that the
wolf-dogs were holding the dyryth at bay.  At sight of me several of
the savage creatures left off worrying the great brute to come slinking
with bared fangs toward me, and as I turned to run toward the trees
again to seek safety among the lower branches, I saw a number of the
man-apes leaping and chattering in the foliage of the nearest tree.

Between them and the beasts behind me there was little choice, but at
least there was a doubt as to the reception these grotesque parodies on
humanity would accord me, while there was none as to the fate which
awaited me beneath the grinning fangs of my fierce pursuers.

And so I raced on toward the trees intending to pass beneath that which
held the man-things and take refuge in another farther on; but the
wolf-dogs were very close behind me--so close that I had despaired of
escaping them, when one of the creatures in the tree above swung down
headforemost, his tail looped about a great limb, and grasping me
beneath my armpits swung me in safety up among his fellows.

There they fell to examining me with the utmost excitement and
curiosity.  They picked at my clothing, my hair, and my flesh.  They
turned me about to see if I had a tail, and when they discovered that I
was not so equipped they fell into roars of laughter.  Their teeth were
very large and white and even, except for the upper canines which were
a trifle longer than the others--protruding just a bit when the mouth
was closed.

When they had examined me for a few moments one of them discovered that
my clothing was not a part of me, with the result that garment by
garment they tore it from me amidst peals of the wildest laughter.
Apelike, they essayed to don the apparel themselves, but their
ingenuity was not sufficient to the task and so they gave it up.

In the meantime I had been straining my eyes to catch a glimpse of
Perry, but nowhere about could I see him, although the clump of trees
in which he had first taken refuge was in full view.  I was much
exercised by fear that something had befallen him, and though I called
his name aloud several times there was no response.

Tired at last of playing with my clothing the creatures threw it to the
ground, and catching me, one on either side, by an arm, started off at
a most terrifying pace through the tree tops.  Never have I experienced
such a journey before or since--even now I oftentimes awake from a deep
sleep haunted by the horrid remembrance of that awful experience.

From tree to tree the agile creatures sprang like flying squirrels,
while the cold sweat stood upon my brow as I glimpsed the depths
beneath, into which a single misstep on the part of either of my
bearers would hurl me.  As they bore me along, my mind was occupied
with a thousand bewildering thoughts.  What had become of Perry?  Would
I ever see him again?  What were the intentions of these half-human
things into whose hands I had fallen?  Were they inhabitants of the
same world into which I had been born?  No!  It could not be.  But yet
where else?  I had not left that earth--of that I was sure.  Still
neither could I reconcile the things which I had seen to a belief that
I was still in the world of my birth.  With a sigh I gave it up.


