"It is very wonderful," said Turan. "It must require great skill and
patience and time."

"That it does," replied the old man, "though having done it so long I
am quicker than most; but mine are the most natural. Why, I would defy
the wife of that warrior to say that insofar as appearances are
concerned he does not live," and he pointed at the man upon the thoat.
"Many of them, of course, are brought here wasted or badly wounded and
these I have to repair. That is where great skill is required, for
everyone wants his dead to look as they did at their best in life; but
you shall learn--to mount them and paint them and repair them and
sometimes to make an ugly one look beautiful. And it will be a great
comfort to be able to mount your own. Why, for fifteen hundred years no
one has mounted my own dead but myself.

"I have many, my balconies are crowded with them; but I keep a great
room for my wives. I have them all, as far back as the first one, and
many is the evening I spend with them--quiet evenings and very
pleasant. And then the pleasure of preparing them and making them even
more beautiful than in life partially recompenses one for their loss. I
take my time with them, looking for a new one while I am working on the
old. When I am not sure about a new one I bring her to the chamber
where my wives are, and compare her charms with theirs, and there is
always a great satisfaction at such times in knowing that they will not
object. I love harmony."

"Did you prepare all the warriors in The Hall of Chiefs?" asked Turan.

"Yes, I prepare them and repair them," replied the old man. "O-Tar will
trust no other. Even now I have two in another room who were damaged in
some way and brought down to me. O-Tar does not like to have them gone
long, since it leaves two riderless thoats in the Hall; but I shall
have them ready presently. He wants them all there in the event any
momentous question arises upon which the living jeds cannot agree, or
do not agree with O-Tar. Such questions he carries to the jeds in The
Hall of Chiefs. There he shuts himself up alone with the great chiefs
who have attained wisdom through death. It is an excellent plan and
there is never any friction or misunderstandings. O-Tar has said that
it is the finest deliberative body upon Barsoom--much more intelligent
than that composed of the living jeds. But come, we must get to work;
come into the next chamber and I will begin your instruction."

He led the way into the chamber in which lay the several corpses upon
their marble slabs, and going to a cabinet he donned a pair of huge
spectacles and commenced to select various tools from little
compartments. This done he turned again toward his two pupils.

"Now let me have a look at you," he said. "My eyes are not what they
once were, and I need these powerful lenses for my work, or to see
distinctly the features of those around me."

He turned his eyes upon the two before him. Turan held his breath for
he knew that now the man must discover that they wore not the harness
or insignia of Manator. He had wondered before why the old fellow had
not noticed it, for he had not known that he was half blind. The other
examined their faces, his eyes lingering long upon the beauty of Tara
of Helium, and then they drifted to the harness of the two. Turan
thought that he noted an appreciable start of surprise on the part of
the taxidermist, but if the old man noticed anything his next words did
not reveal it.

"Come with I-Gos," he said to Turan, "I have materials in the next room
that I would have you fetch hither. Remain here, woman, we shall be
gone but a moment."

He led the way to one of the numerous doors opening into the chamber
and entered ahead of Turan. Just inside the door he stopped, and
pointing to a bundle of silks and furs upon the opposite side of the
room directed Turan to fetch them. The latter had crossed the room and
was stooping to raise the bundle when he heard the click of a lock
behind him. Wheeling instantly he saw that he was alone in the room and
that the single door was closed. Running rapidly to it he strove to
open it, only to find that he was a prisoner.

I-Gos, stepping out and locking the door behind him, turned toward Tara.

"Your leather betrayed you," he said, laughing his cackling laugh. "You
sought to deceive old I-Gos, but you found that though his eyes are
weak his brain is not. But it shall not go ill with you. You are
beautiful and I-Gos loves beautiful women. I might not have you
elsewhere in Manator, but here there is none to deny old I-Gos. Few
come to the pits of the dead--only those who bring the dead and they
hasten away as fast as they can. No one will know that I-Gos has a
beautiful woman locked with his dead. I shall ask you no questions and
then I will not have to give you up, for I will not know to whom you
belong, eh? And when you die I shall mount you beautifully and place
you in the chamber with my other women. Will not that be fine, eh?" He
had approached until he stood close beside the horrified girl. "Come!"
he cried, seizing her by the wrist. "Come to I-Gos!"



