He fell asleep with a broad grin upon his face.

Manu, the monkey, awoke him in the morning by dropping discarded bean
pods upon his upturned face from a branch a short distance above him.
Tarzan looked up and smiled.  He had been awakened thus before many
times.  He and Manu were fairly good friends, their friendship
operating upon a reciprocal basis.  Sometimes Manu would come running
early in the morning to awaken Tarzan and tell him that Bara, the deer,
was feeding close at hand, or that Horta, the boar, was asleep in a
mudhole hard by, and in return Tarzan broke open the shells of the
harder nuts and fruits for Manu, or frightened away Histah, the snake,
and Sheeta, the panther.

The sun had been up for some time, and the tribe had already wandered
off in search of food.  Manu indicated the direction they had taken
with a wave of his hand and a few piping notes of his squeaky little
voice.

"Come, Manu," said Tarzan, "and you will see that which shall make you
dance for joy and squeal your wrinkled little head off.  Come, follow
Tarzan of the Apes."

With that he set off in the direction Manu had indicated and above him,
chattering, scolding and squealing, skipped Manu, the monkey.  Across
Tarzan's shoulders was the thing he had stolen from the village of
Mbonga, the chief, the evening before.

The tribe was feeding in the forest beside the clearing where Gunto,
and Taug, and Tarzan had so harassed Numa and finally taken away from
him the fruit of his kill.  Some of them were in the clearing itself.
In peace and content they fed, for were there not three sentries, each
watching upon a different side of the herd? Tarzan had taught them
this, and though he had been away for several days hunting alone, as he
often did, or visiting at the cabin by the sea, they had not as yet
forgotten his admonitions, and if they continued for a short time
longer to post sentries, it would become a habit of their tribal life
and thus be perpetuated indefinitely.

But Tarzan, who knew them better than they knew themselves, was
confident that they had ceased to place the watchers about them the
moment that he had left them, and now he planned not only to have a
little fun at their expense but to teach them a lesson in preparedness,
which, by the way, is even a more vital issue in the jungle than in
civilized places.  That you and I exist today must be due to the
preparedness of some shaggy anthropoid of the Oligocene.  Of course the
apes of Kerchak were always prepared, after their own way--Tarzan had
merely suggested a new and additional safeguard.

Gunto was posted today to the north of the clearing.  He squatted in
the fork of a tree from where he might view the jungle for quite a
distance about him.  It was he who first discovered the enemy.  A
rustling in the undergrowth attracted his attention, and a moment later
he had a partial view of a shaggy mane and tawny yellow back.  Just a
glimpse it was through the matted foliage beneath him; but it brought
from Gunto's leathern lungs a shrill "Kreeg-ah!" which is the ape for
beware, or danger.

Instantly the tribe took up the cry until "Kreeg-ahs!" rang through the
jungle about the clearing as apes swung quickly to places of safety
among the lower branches of the trees and the great bulls hastened in
the direction of Gunto.

And then into the clearing strode Numa, the lion--majestic and mighty,
and from a deep chest issued the moan and the cough and the rumbling
roar that set stiff hairs to bristling from shaggy craniums down the
length of mighty spines.

Inside the clearing, Numa paused and on the instant there fell upon him
from the trees near by a shower of broken rock and dead limbs torn from
age-old trees.  A dozen times he was hit, and then the apes ran down
and gathered other rocks, pelting him unmercifully.

Numa turned to flee, but his way was barred by a fusilade of
sharp-cornered missiles, and then, upon the edge of the clearing, great
Taug met him with a huge fragment of rock as large as a man's head, and
down went the Lord of the Jungle beneath the stunning blow.

With shrieks and roars and loud barkings the great apes of the tribe of
Kerchak rushed upon the fallen lion.  Sticks and stones and yellow
fangs menaced the still form.  In another moment, before he could
regain consciousness, Numa would be battered and torn until only a
bloody mass of broken bones and matted hair remained of what had once
been the most dreaded of jungle creatures.

But even as the sticks and stones were raised above him and the great
fangs bared to tear him, there descended like a plummet from the trees
above a diminutive figure with long, white whiskers and a wrinkled
face.  Square upon the body of Numa it alighted and there it danced and
screamed and shrieked out its challenge against the bulls of Kerchak.

For an instant they paused, paralyzed by the wonder of the thing.  It
was Manu, the monkey, Manu, the little coward, and here he was daring
the ferocity of the great Mangani, hopping about upon the carcass of
Numa, the lion, and crying out that they must not strike it again.

And when the bulls paused, Manu reached down and seized a tawny ear.
With all his little might he tugged upon the heavy head until slowly it
turned back, revealing the tousled, black head and clean-cut profile of
Tarzan of the Apes.

Some of the older apes were for finishing what they had commenced; but
Taug, sullen, mighty Taug, sprang quickly to the ape-man's side and
straddling the unconscious form warned back those who would have struck
his childhood playmate.  And Teeka, his mate, came too, taking her
place with bared fangs at Taug's side.  Others followed their example,
until at last Tarzan was surrounded by a ring of hairy champions who
would permit no enemy to approach him.

It was a surprised and chastened Tarzan who opened his eyes to
consciousness a few minutes later.  He looked about him at the
surrounding apes and slowly there returned to him a realization of what
had occurred.

Gradually a broad grin illuminated his features.  His bruises were many
and they hurt; but the good that had come from his adventure was worth
all that it had cost.  He had learned, for instance, that the apes of
Kerchak had heeded his teaching, and he had learned that he had good
friends among the sullen beasts whom he had thought without sentiment.
He had discovered that Manu, the monkey--even little, cowardly
Manu--had risked his life in his defense.

It made Tarzan very glad to know these things; but at the other lesson
he had been taught he reddened.  He had always been a joker, the only
joker in the grim and terrible company; but now as he lay there half
dead from his hurts, he almost swore a solemn oath forever to forego
practical joking--almost; but not quite.




