None of the prophets puts the point more clearly than Isaiah. After
condemning hypocrisy, he commends liberty and charity towards oneself
and one's neighbors, and promises as a reward: "Then shall thy light
break forth as the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily,
thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall
be thy reward" (chap. lviii. 8). Shortly afterwards he commends the
Sabbath, and for a due observance of it promises: "Then shalt thou
delight thyself in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high
places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
father: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it." Thus the prophet, for
liberty bestowed and charitable works, promises a healthy mind in a
healthy body, and the glory of the Lord even after death; whereas, for
ceremonial exactitude, he only promises security of rule, prosperity,
and temporal happiness.

... It remains to show why and how the ceremonial observances tended to
preserve and confirm the Hebrew kingdom; and this I can very briefly do
on grounds universally accepted.

The formation of society serves not only for defensive purposes, but is
also very useful, and, indeed, absolutely necessary, as rendering
possible the division of labor. If men did not render mutual assistance
to each other, no one would have either the skill or the time to provide
for his own sustenance and preservation: for all men are not equally
apt for all work, and no one would be capable of preparing all that he
individually stood in need of. Strength and time, I repeat, would fail,
if every one had in person to plow, to sow, to reap, to grind corn, to
cook, to weave, to stitch and perform the other numerous functions
required to keep life going; to say nothing of the arts and sciences
which are also entirely necessary to the perfection and blessedness of
human nature. We see that peoples living in uncivilized barbarism lead a
wretched and almost animal life, and even they would not be able to
acquire their few rude necessaries without assisting one another to a
certain extent.

Now if men were so constituted by nature that they desired nothing but
what is designated by true reason, society would obviously have no need
of laws: it would be sufficient to inculcate true moral doctrines; and
men would freely, without hesitation, act in accordance with their true
interests. But human nature is framed in a different fashion: every one,
indeed, seeks his own interest, but does not do so in accordance with
the dictates of sound reason, for most men's ideas of desirability and
usefulness are guided by their fleshly instincts and emotions, which
take no thought beyond the present and the immediate object. Therefore,
no society can exist without government, and force, and laws to restrain
and repress men's desires and immoderate impulses. Still human nature
will not submit to absolute repression. Violent governments, as Seneca
says, never last long; the moderate governments endure.

So long as men act simply from fear they act contrary to their
inclinations, taking no thought for the advantages or necessity of their
actions, but simply endeavoring to escape punishment or loss of life.
They must needs rejoice in any evil which befalls their ruler, even if
it should involve themselves; and must long for and bring about such
evil by every means in their power. Again, men are especially intolerant
of serving and being ruled by their equals. Lastly, it is exceedingly
difficult to revoke liberties once granted.

From these considerations it follows, firstly, that authority should
either be vested in the hands of the whole state in common, so that
every one should be bound to serve, and yet not be in subjection to his
equals; or else, if power be in the hands of a few, or one man, that one
man should be something above average humanity, or should strive to get
himself accepted as such. Secondly, laws should in every government be
so arranged that people should be kept in bounds by the hope of some
greatly desired good, rather than by fear, for then every one will do
his duty willingly.


