Seven or eight years later the Queen of a neighboring kingdom had two
daughters who were twins. The first born of these was more beautiful
than the day; whereat the Queen was so very glad that those present were
afraid that her excess of joy would do her harm. The same fairy who was
present at the birth of little Riquet with the Tuft was here also, and,
to moderate the Queen's gladness, she declared that this little Princess
should have no sense at all, but should be as stupid as she was pretty.
This mortified the Queen extremely; but afterward she had a far greater
sorrow, for the second daughter proved to be very ugly.

"Do not afflict yourself so much, madam," said the fairy. "Your daughter
shall have her recompense; she shall have so great a portion of sense
that the want of beauty will hardly be perceived."

"God grant it," replied the Queen; "but is there no way to make the
eldest, who is so pretty, have any sense?"

"I can do nothing for her, madam, as to sense," answered the fairy, "but
everything as to beauty; and as there is nothing I would not do for your
satisfaction, I give her for gift that she shall have power to make
handsome the person who shall best please her."

As these princesses grew up, their perfections grew with them. All the
public talk was of the beauty of the elder and the rare good sense of
the younger. It is true also that their defects increased considerably
with their age. The younger visibly grew uglier and uglier, and the
elder became every day more and more stupid: she either made no answer
at all to what was asked her, or said something very silly. She was with
all this so unhandy that she could not place four pieces of china upon
the mantelpiece without breaking one of them, nor drink a glass of water
without spilling half of it upon her clothes.

Although beauty is a very great advantage in young people, the younger
sister was always the more preferred in society. People would indeed go
first to the Beauty to look upon and admire her, but turn aside soon
after to the Wit to hear a thousand most entertaining and agreeable
things; and it was amazing to see, in less than a quarter of an hour's
time, the elder with not a soul near her, and the whole company crowding
about the younger. The elder, dull as she was, could not fail to notice
this; and without the slightest regret would have given all her beauty
to have half her sister's wit. The Queen, prudent as she was, could not
help reproaching her several times for her stupidity, which almost made
the poor Princess die of grief.

One day, as she had hidden herself in a wood to bewail her misfortune,
she saw coming to her a very disagreeable little man, but most
magnificently dressed. This was the young Prince Riquet with the Tuft,
who having fallen in love with her upon seeing her picture,--many of
which were distributed all the world over,--had left his father's
kingdom to have the pleasure of seeing and talking with her. Overjoyed
to find her thus alone, he addressed himself to her with all imaginable
politeness and respect. Having observed, after he had paid her the
ordinary compliments, that she was extremely melancholy, he said to
her:--

"I cannot comprehend, madam, how a person so beautiful as you are can be
so sorrowful as you seem to be; for though I can boast of having seen a
great number of exquisitely charming ladies, I can say that I never
beheld any one whose beauty approaches yours."

"You are pleased to say so," answered the Princess, and here she
stopped.


