Once upon a time there was a gentleman who married, for his second wife,
the proudest and most haughty woman that ever was seen. She had two
daughters of her own, who were, indeed, exactly like her in all things.
The gentleman had also a young daughter, of rare goodness and sweetness
of temper, which she took from her mother, who was the best creature in
the world.

The wedding was scarcely over, when the stepmother's bad temper began to
show itself. She could not bear the goodness of this young girl, because
it made her own daughters appear the more odious. The stepmother gave
her the meanest work in the house to do; she had to scour the dishes,
tables, etc., and to scrub the floors and clean out the bedrooms. The
poor girl had to sleep in the garret, upon a wretched straw bed, while
her sisters lay in fine rooms with inlaid floors, upon beds of the very
newest fashion, and where they had looking-glasses so large that they
might see themselves at their full length. The poor girl bore all
patiently, and dared not complain to her father, who would have scolded
her if she had done so, for his wife governed him entirely.

When she had done her work, she used to go into the chimney corner, and
sit down among the cinders, hence she was called Cinderwench. The
younger sister of the two, who was not so rude and uncivil as the elder,
called her Cinderella. However, Cinderella, in spite of her mean
apparel, was a hundred times more handsome than her sisters, though they
were always richly dressed.

It happened that the King's son gave a ball, and invited to it all
persons of fashion. Our young misses were also invited, for they cut a
very grand figure among the people of the country-side. They were highly
delighted with the invitation, and wonderfully busy in choosing the
gowns, petticoats, and head-dresses which might best become them. This
made Cinderella's lot still harder, for it was she who ironed her
sisters' linen and plaited their ruffles. They talked all day long of
nothing but how they should be dressed.

"For my part," said the elder, "I will wear my red velvet suit with
French trimmings."

"And I," said the younger, "shall wear my usual skirt; but then, to make
amends for that I will put on my gold-flowered mantle, and my diamond
stomacher, which is far from being the most ordinary one in the world."
They sent for the best hairdressers they could get to make up their hair
in fashionable style, and bought patches for their cheeks. Cinderella
was consulted in all these matters, for she had good taste. She advised
them always for the best, and even offered her services to dress their
hair, which they were very willing she should do.

As she was doing this, they said to her:--

"Cinderella, would you not be glad to go to the ball?"

"Young ladies," she said, "you only jeer at me; it is not for such as I
am to go there."

"You are right," they replied; "people would laugh to see a Cinderwench
at a ball."

Any one but Cinderella would have dressed their hair awry, but she was
good-natured, and arranged it perfectly well. They were almost two days
without eating, so much were they transported with joy. They broke above
a dozen laces in trying to lace themselves tight, that they might have a
fine, slender shape, and they were continually at their looking-glass.

At last the happy day came; they went to Court, and Cinderella followed
them with her eyes as long as she could, and when she had lost sight of
them, she fell a-crying.


