Once upon a time there was a man who had fine houses, both in town and
country, a deal of silver and gold plate, carved furniture, and coaches
gilded all over. But unhappily this man had a blue beard, which made him
so ugly and so terrible that all the women and girls ran away from him.

One of his neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were
perfect beauties. He asked for one of them in marriage, leaving to her
the choice of which she would bestow on him. They would neither of them
have him, and they sent him backward and forward from one to the other,
neither being able to make up her mind to marry a man who had a blue
beard. Another thing which made them averse to him was that he had
already married several wives, and nobody knew what had become of them.

Blue Beard, to become better acquainted, took them, with their mother
and three or four of their best friends, with some young people of the
neighborhood to one of his country seats, where they stayed a whole
week.

There was nothing going on but pleasure parties, hunting, fishing,
dancing, mirth, and feasting. Nobody went to bed, but all passed the
night in playing pranks on each other. In short, everything succeeded so
well that the youngest daughter began to think that the beard of the
master of the house was not so very blue, and that he was a very civil
gentleman. So as soon as they returned home, the marriage was concluded.

About a month afterward Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to
take a country journey for six weeks at least, upon business of great
importance. He desired her to amuse herself well in his absence, to send
for her friends, to take them into the country, if she pleased, and to
live well wherever she was.

"Here," said he, "are the keys of the two great warehouses wherein I
have my best furniture: these are of the room where I keep my silver and
gold plate, which is not in everyday use; these open my safes, which
hold my money, both gold and silver; these my caskets of jewels; and
this is the master-key to all my apartments. But as for this little key,
it is the key of the closet at the end of the great gallery on the
ground floor. Open them all; go everywhere; but as for that little
closet, I forbid you to enter it, and I promise you surely that, if you
open it, there's nothing that you may not expect from my anger."

She promised to obey exactly all his orders; and he, after having
embraced her, got into his coach and proceeded on his journey.

Her neighbors and good friends did not stay to be sent for by the
new-married lady, so great was their impatience to see all the riches of
her house, not daring to come while her husband was there, because of
his blue beard, which frightened them. They at once ran through all the
rooms, closets, and wardrobes, which were so fine and rich, and each
seemed to surpass all others. They went up into the warehouses, where
was the best and richest furniture; and they could not sufficiently
admire the number and beauty of the tapestry, beds, couches, cabinets,
stands, tables, and looking-glasses, in which you might see yourself
from head to foot. Some of them were framed with glass, others with
silver, plain and gilded, the most beautiful and the most magnificent
ever seen.



