A strong feeling of compassion for the Beast came over Beauty when she
was left alone. "Alas!" she said, "it is a pity he is so ugly, for he is
so good!"

Beauty spent three months in the castle, more or less happily. The Beast
paid her a visit every evening, and conversed with her as she ate her
supper, showing good sense in his talk, but not what the world deems
cleverness. Every day Beauty discovered some fresh good quality in the
monster; she grew accustomed to his ugliness, and far from fearing his
visit, she would often look at her watch to see if it was nearly nine
o'clock, for the Beast always arrived punctually at that hour. There was
only one thing which caused distress to Beauty, and that was, that every
evening before retiring, the monster asked her if she would be his wife,
and always appeared overcome with sorrow at her refusal. One day she
said to him, "You grieve me, Beast; I wish it were possible for me to
marry you, but I am too truthful to make you believe that such a thing
could ever happen; I shall always be your friend, try to be satisfied
with that." "I suppose I must," responded the Beast; "I know I am
horrible to look upon, but I love you very much. However, I am but too
happy that you consent to remain here; promise me that you will never
leave me." The colour came into Beauty's face; her mirror had shown her
that her father was ill with the grief of losing her, and she was hoping
to see him again. "I would promise without hesitation never to leave
you," said Beauty to him, "but I do so long to see my father again, that
I shall die of sorrow if you refuse me this pleasure." "I would rather
die myself," said the monster, "than give you pain; I will send you home
to your father, you will stay there, and your poor Beast will die of
grief at your absence." "No, no," said Beauty, crying; "I care for you
too much to wish to cause your death; I promise to return in a week's
time. You have let me see that my sisters are married, and that my
brothers have entered the army. My father is all alone, let me remain
with him a week." "You shall be with him to-morrow morning, but remember
your promise. When you wish to return, you have only to put your ring on
the table before going to bed. Farewell, Beauty." The Beast gave his
usual sigh as he said these words, and Beauty went to bed feeling
troubled at the thought of the sorrow she had caused him. When she awoke
the following morning, she found herself at home, and ringing a little
bell that stood beside her bed, the maid-servant came in, who gave a
loud cry of astonishment at seeing her there. Her father ran in on
hearing the cry, and almost died of joy when he found his dear daughter,
and they remained clasped in each other's arms for more than a quarter
of an hour.

Beauty, after the first transports of joy were over, remembered that she
had no clothes with her; but the servant told her that she had just
found a trunk in the next room, in which were dresses of gold fabric,
trimmed with diamonds. Beauty thanked the kind Beast for his
thoughtfulness. She took out the least costly of the dresses, and told
the maid to lock the others away again, as she wished to give them to
her sisters; but she had no sooner uttered these words, than the trunk
disappeared. Her father said to her that the Beast evidently wished her
to keep them all for herself, and the trunk and the dresses immediately
reappeared.

Beauty dressed herself, and, meanwhile, news of her arrival was sent to
her sisters, who came in haste with their husbands. They were both
extremely unhappy. The eldest had married a young man who was as
handsome as nature could make him, but he was so in love with his own
face, that he could think of nothing else from morning to night, and
cared nothing for the beauty of his wife. The second had married a very
witty and clever man, but he only made use of his ability to put
everybody in a bad temper, beginning with his wife.

Her sisters nearly died of envy when they saw Beauty dressed like a
princess, and beautiful as the day. In vain she showered caresses upon
them, nothing could stifle their jealousy, which only increased when she
told them how happy she was.

These two jealous creatures went into the garden, that they might cry
more at their ease. They said to one another, "Why should this wretched
little thing be happier than we are? Are we not more attractive than she
is?"

"Sister," said the eldest one, "an idea has occurred to me: let us try
to keep her here over the week. Her stupid old Beast will be enraged at
her breaking her word, and perhaps he will devour her." "You are right,
sister," replied the other; "to carry out our plan, we must appear very
loving and kind to her." And having settled this, they went back to the
house and were so affectionate to her, that Beauty cried for joy. When
the week drew to a close, the two sisters showed such signs of grief at
her departure, and made such lamentation, that she promised to stay till
the end of the second one. Beauty, however, reproached herself for the
sorrow she would cause her poor Beast, whom she loved with all her
heart; and she began to miss him very much. On the tenth night of her
absence, she dreamed that she was in the garden of the castle, and that
she saw the Beast lying on the grass, apparently dying, and that he
reproached her with her ingratitude. Beauty awoke with a start, and
wept. "I am indeed wicked," she said, "to behave so ungratefully to a
Beast who has been so considerate and kind to me! Is it his fault that
he is ugly and that he is not clever? He is good, and that is worth
everything else. Why did I refuse to marry him? I should be happier with
him than my sisters are with their husbands. It is neither beauty nor
wit in a husband which makes a wife happy; it is amiability of
character, uprightness and generosity: and the Beast has all these good
qualities. I do not love him, but I respect him, and I feel both
affection for him, and gratitude. I will not make him unhappy; should I
do so, I should reproach myself for it as long as I live."

With these words, Beauty rose, placed her ring on a table, and lay down
again. The moment she was in bed, she fell asleep, and when she awoke
next morning, she saw with delight that she was back in the Beast's
castle. She dressed herself magnificently, in order to please him, and
the hours seemed to drag as she waited for nine o'clock to strike; but
the hour came, and the Beast did not appear.


