"For Prince Riquet with the Tuft," said the chief of them, "who is to be
married to-morrow."

The Princess, more surprised than ever, and recollecting all at once
that it was now that day twelvemonth on which she had promised to marry
the Prince Riquet with the Tuft, was ready to sink into the ground.

What made her forget this was that when she made this promise, she was
very silly; and having obtained that vast stock of sense which the
prince had bestowed upon her, she had entirely forgotten the things she
had done in the days of her stupidity. She continued her walk, but had
not taken thirty steps before Riquet with the Tuft presented himself to
her, gallant and most magnificently dressed, like a prince who was going
to be married.

"You see, madam," said he, "I am exact in keeping my word, and doubt not
in the least but you are come hither to perform your promise."

"I frankly confess," answered the Princess, "that I have not yet come to
a decision in this matter, and I believe I never shall be able to arrive
at such a one as you desire."

"You astonish me, madam," said Riquet with the Tuft.

"I can well believe it," said the Princess; "and surely if I had to do
with a clown, or a man of no sense, I should find myself very much at a
loss. 'A princess always keeps her word,' he would say to me, 'and you
must marry me, since you promised to do so.' But as he to whom I talk
is the one man in the world who is master of the greatest sense and
judgment, I am sure he will hear reason. You know that when I was but a
fool I could scarcely make up my mind to marry you; why will you have
me, now I have so much judgment as you gave me, come to such a decision
which I could not then make up my mind to agree to? If you sincerely
thought to make me your wife, you have been greatly in the wrong to
deprive me of my dull simplicity, and make me see things much more
clearly than I did."

"If a man of no wit and sense," replied Riquet with the Tuft, "would be
well received, as you say, in reproaching you for breach of your word,
why will you not let me, madam, have the same usage in a matter wherein
all the happiness of my life is concerned? Is it reasonable that persons
of wit and sense should be in a worse condition than those who have
none? Can you pretend this, you who have so great a share, and desired
so earnestly to have it? But let us come to the fact, if you please.
Putting aside my ugliness and deformity, is there anything in me which
displeased you? Are you dissatisfied with my birth, my wit, my humor, or
my manners?"

"Not at all," answered the Princess; "I love you and respect you in all
that you mention."

