The princess had retired one day to a wood to bemoan her misfortune,
when she saw approaching her an ugly little man, of very disagreeable
appearance, but clad in magnificent attire.

This was the young prince Ricky of the Tuft. He had fallen in love with
her portrait, which was everywhere to be seen, and had left his father's
kingdom in order to have the pleasure of seeing and talking to her.

Delighted to meet her thus alone, he approached with every mark of
respect and politeness. But while he paid her the usual compliments he
noticed that she was plunged in melancholy.

'I cannot understand, madam,' he said, 'how any one with your beauty can
be so sad as you appear. I can boast of having seen many fair ladies,
and I declare that none of them could compare in beauty with you.'

'It is very kind of you to say so, sir,' answered the princess; and
stopped there, at a loss what to say further.

'Beauty,' said Ricky, 'is of such great advantage that everything else
can be disregarded; and I do not see that the possessor of it can have
anything much to grieve about.'

To this the princess replied:

'I would rather be as plain as you are and have some sense, than be as
beautiful as I am and at the same time stupid.'

'Nothing more clearly displays good sense, madam, than a belief that one
is not possessed of it. It follows, therefore, that the more one has,
the more one fears it to be wanting.'

'I am not sure about that,' said the princess; 'but I know only too well
that I am very stupid, and this is the reason of the misery which is
nearly killing me.'

'If that is all that troubles you, madam, I can easily put an end to
your suffering.'

'How will you manage that?' said the princess.

'I am able, madam,' said Ricky of the Tuft, 'to bestow as much good
sense as it is possible to possess on the person whom I love the most.
You are that person, and it therefore rests with you to decide whether
you will acquire so much intelligence. The only condition is that you
shall consent to marry me.'

The princess was dumbfounded, and remained silent.

'I can see,' pursued Ricky, 'that this suggestion perplexes you, and I
am not surprised. But I will give you a whole year to make up your mind
to it.'

The princess had so little sense, and at the same time desired it so
ardently, that she persuaded herself the end of this year would never
come. So she accepted the offer which had been made to her. No sooner
had she given her word to Ricky that she would marry him within one year
from that very day, than she felt a complete change come over her. She
found herself able to say all that she wished with the greatest ease,
and to say it in an elegant, finished, and natural manner. She at once
engaged Ricky in a brilliant and lengthy conversation, holding her own
so well that Ricky feared he had given her a larger share of sense than
he had retained for himself.

On her return to the palace amazement reigned throughout the Court at
such a sudden and extraordinary change. Whereas formerly they had been
accustomed to hear her give vent to silly, pert remarks, they now heard
her express herself sensibly and very wittily.

The entire Court was overjoyed. The only person not too pleased was the
younger sister, for now that she had no longer the advantage over the
elder in wit, she seemed nothing but a little fright in comparison.

The king himself often took her advice, and several times held his
councils in her apartment.


