Her godmother simply touched her with her wand, and, at the same moment,
her clothes were turned into cloth of gold and silver, all decked with
jewels. This done, she gave her a pair of the prettiest glass slippers
in the whole world. Being thus attired, she got into the carriage, her
godmother commanding her, above all things, not to stay till after
midnight, and telling her, at the same time, that if she stayed one
moment longer, the coach would be a pumpkin again, her horses mice, her
coachman a rat, her footmen lizards, and her clothes would become just
as they were before.

She promised her godmother she would not fail to leave the ball before
midnight. She drove away, scarce able to contain herself for joy. The
King's son, who was told that a great princess, whom nobody knew, was
come, ran out to receive her. He gave her his hand as she alighted from
the coach, and led her into the hall where the company were assembled.
There was at once a profound silence; every one left off dancing, and
the violins ceased to play, so attracted was every one by the singular
beauties of the unknown newcomer. Nothing was then heard but a confused
sound of voices saying:--

"Ha! how beautiful she is! Ha! how beautiful she is!"

The King himself, old as he was, could not keep his eyes off her, and he
told the Queen under his breath that it was a long time since he had
seen so beautiful and lovely a creature.

All the ladies were busy studying her clothes and head-dress, so that
they might have theirs made next day after the same pattern, provided
they could meet with such fine materials and able hands to make them.

The King's son conducted her to the seat of honor, and afterwards took
her out to dance with him. She danced so very gracefully that they all
admired her more and more. A fine collation was served, but the young
Prince ate not a morsel, so intently was he occupied with her.

She went and sat down beside her sisters, showing them a thousand
civilities, and giving them among other things part of the oranges and
citrons with which the Prince had regaled her. This very much surprised
them, for they had not been presented to her.

Cinderella heard the clock strike a quarter to twelve. She at once made
her adieus to the company and hastened away as fast as she could.

As soon as she got home, she ran to find her godmother, and, after
having thanked her, she said she much wished she might go to the ball
the next day, because the King's son had asked her to do so. As she was
eagerly telling her godmother all that happened at the ball, her two
sisters knocked at the door; Cinderella opened it. "How long you have
stayed!" said she, yawning, rubbing her eyes, and stretching herself as
if she had been just awakened. She had not, however, had any desire to
sleep since they went from home.


