It took the Frog a year and four days to climb the ten thousand steps
which led from the gloomy realm in which she had left the queen, up into
the world. Another year was spent in preparing her equipage, for she was
too proud to consent to appear at Court like a poor and humble frog from
the marshes. A little sedan-chair was made for her, large enough to hold
a couple of eggs comfortably, and this was covered outside with
tortoise-shell and lined with lizard-skin. From the little green frogs
that hop about the meadows she selected fifty to act as maids of honour,
and each of these was mounted on a snail. They had dainty saddles, and
rode in dashing style with the leg thrown over the saddle-bow. A
numerous bodyguard of rats, dressed like pages, ran before the
snails--in short, nothing so captivating had ever been seen before. To
crown all, the cap of roses, which never faded but was always in full
bloom, most admirably became her. Being something of a coquette, too,
she could not refrain from a touch of rouge and a patch or two; indeed,
some said she was painted like a great many other ladies of the land,
but it has been proved by inquiry that this report had its origin with
her enemies.

The journey lasted seven years, and during all that time the poor queen
endured unutterable pain and suffering. Had it not been for the solace
of the beautiful Moufette she must have died a hundred times. Every word
that the dear little creature uttered filled her with delight; indeed,
with the exception of the Lion-Witch, there was nobody who was not
charmed by her.

There came at length a day, after the queen had lived for six years in
this dismal region, when the Witch told her that she could go hunting
with her, on condition that she yielded up everything which she killed.
The queen's joy when she once more saw the sun may be imagined; though
at first she thought she would be blinded, so unaccustomed to its light
had she become. So quick and lively was Moufette, even at five or six
years of age, that she never failed in her aim, and mother and daughter
together were thus able to appease somewhat the fierce instincts of the
Witch.

Meanwhile the Frog was travelling over hills and valleys. Day or night,
she never stopped, and at last she came nigh to the capital, where the
king was now in residence. To her astonishment signs of festivity met
her eye at every turn; on all sides there was merriment, song and
dancing, and the nearer she came to the city the more festive seemed the
mood of the people. All flocked with amazement to see her rustic
retinue, and by the time she reached the city the crowd had become so
large that it was with difficulty she made her way to the palace.


