"I will have it so," replied the Queen (and this she spoke in the tone
of an Ogress who had a strong desire to eat fresh meat), "and will eat
her with a sharp sauce."

The poor man, knowing very well that he must not play tricks with
Ogresses, took his great knife and went up into little Dawn's chamber.
She was then nearly four years old, and came up to him, jumping and
laughing, to put her arms round his neck, and ask him for some
sugar-candy. Upon which he began to weep, the great knife fell out of
his hand, and he went into the back yard and killed a little lamb, and
dressed it with such good sauce that his mistress assured him she had
never eaten anything so good in her life. He had at the same time taken
up little Dawn and carried her to his wife, to conceal her in his
lodging at the end of the courtyard.

Eight days afterwards the wicked Queen said to the chief cook, "I will
sup upon little Day."

He answered not a word, being resolved to cheat her again as he had done
before. He went to find little Day, and saw him with a foil in his hand,
with which he was fencing with a great monkey: the child was then only
three years of age. He took him up in his arms and carried him to his
wife, that she might conceal him in her chamber along with his sister,
and instead of little Day he served up a young and very tender kid,
which the Ogress found to be wonderfully good.

All had gone well up to now; but one evening this wicked Queen said to
her chief cook:--

"I will eat the Queen with the same sauce I had with her children."

Now the poor chief cook was in despair and could not imagine how to
deceive her again. The young Queen was over twenty years old, not
reckoning the hundred years she had been asleep: and how to find
something to take her place greatly puzzled him. He then decided, to
save his own life, to cut the Queen's throat; and going up into her
chamber, with intent to do it at once, he put himself into as great fury
as he possibly could, and came into the young Queen's room with his
dagger in his hand. He would not, however, deceive her, but told her,
with a great deal of respect, the orders he had received from the
Queen-mother.

"Do it; do it," she said, stretching out her neck. "Carry out your
orders, and then I shall go and see my children, my poor children, whom
I loved so much and so tenderly."

For she thought them dead, since they had been taken away without her
knowledge.

"No, no, madam," cried the poor chief cook, all in tears; "you shall not
die, and you shall see your children again at once. But then you must
go home with me to my lodgings, where I have concealed them, and I will
deceive the Queen once more, by giving her a young hind in your stead."

Upon this he forthwith conducted her to his room, where, leaving her to
embrace her children, and cry along with them, he went and dressed a
young hind, which the Queen had for her supper, and devoured with as
much appetite as if it had been the young Queen. She was now well
satisfied with her cruel deeds, and she invented a story to tell the
King on his return, of how the Queen his wife and her two children had
been devoured by mad wolves.

One evening, as she was, according to her custom, rambling round about
the courts and yards of the palace to see if she could smell any fresh
meat, she heard, in a room on the ground floor, little Day crying, for
his mamma was going to whip him, because he had been naughty; and she
heard, at the same time, little Dawn begging mercy for her brother.

The Ogress knew the voice of the Queen and her children at once, and
being furious at having been thus deceived, she gave orders (in a most
horrible voice which made everybody tremble) that, next morning by break
of day, they should bring into the middle of the great court a large tub
filled with toads, vipers, snakes, and all sorts of serpents, in order
to have the Queen and her children, the chief cook, his wife and maid,
thrown into it, all of whom were to be brought thither with their hands
tied behind them.


