"There is no 'perhaps' about it.  I HAVE done better.  Here is the Hon.
Philip Green, who is a fellow-lodger with you in this hotel, and we may
find him the starting-point for a more successful investigation."

A card had come up on a salver, and it was followed by the same bearded
ruffian who had attacked me in the street.  He started when he saw me.

"What is this, Mr. Holmes?" he asked.  "I had your note and I have
come.  But what has this man to do with the matter?"

"This is my old friend and associate, Dr. Watson, who is helping us in
this affair."

The stranger held out a huge, sunburned hand, with a few words of
apology.

"I hope I didn't harm you.  When you accused me of hurting her I lost
my grip of myself.  Indeed, I'm not responsible in these days.  My
nerves are like live wires.  But this situation is beyond me.  What I
want to know, in the first place, Mr. Holmes, is, how in the world you
came to hear of my existence at all."

"I am in touch with Miss Dobney, Lady Frances's governess."

"Old Susan Dobney with the mob cap!  I remember her well."

"And she remembers you.  It was in the days before--before you found it
better to go to South Africa."

"Ah, I see you know my whole story.  I need hide nothing from you.  I
swear to you, Mr. Holmes, that there never was in this world a man who
loved a woman with a more wholehearted love than I had for Frances.  I
was a wild youngster, I know--not worse than others of my class.  But
her mind was pure as snow.  She could not bear a shadow of coarseness.
So, when she came to hear of things that I had done, she would have no
more to say to me. And yet she loved me--that is the wonder of
it!--loved me well enough to remain single all her sainted days just
for my sake alone.  When the years had passed and I had made my money
at Barberton I thought perhaps I could seek her out and soften her. I
had heard that she was still unmarried, I found her at Lausanne and
tried all I knew.  She weakened, I think, but her will was strong, and
when next I called she had left the town.  I traced her to Baden, and
then after a time heard that her maid was here. I'm a rough fellow,
fresh from a rough life, and when Dr. Watson spoke to me as he did I
lost hold of myself for a moment.  But for God's sake tell me what has
become of the Lady Frances."

"That is for us to find out," said Sherlock Holmes with peculiar
gravity.  "What is your London address, Mr. Green?"

"The Langham Hotel will find me."

"Then may I recommend that you return there and be on hand in case I
should want you?  I have no desire to encourage false hopes, but you
may rest assured that all that can be done will be done for the safety
of Lady Frances.  I can say no more for the instant.  I will leave you
this card so that you may be able to keep in touch with us.  Now,
Watson, if you will pack your bag I will cable to Mrs. Hudson to make
one of her best efforts for two hungry travellers at 7:30 to-morrow."


A telegram was awaiting us when we reached our Baker Street rooms,
which Holmes read with an exclamation of interest and threw across to
me.  "Jagged or torn," was the message, and the place of origin, Baden.

"What is this?" I asked.

"It is everything," Holmes answered.  "You may remember my seemingly
irrelevant question as to this clerical gentleman's left ear. You did
not answer it."

"I had left Baden and could not inquire."

"Exactly.  For this reason I sent a duplicate to the manager of the
Englischer Hof, whose answer lies here."

"What does it show?"
