"Is Miss Dobney the only source of information?  Surely she had other
correspondents?"

"There is one correspondent who is a sure draw, Watson.  That is the
bank.  Single ladies must live, and their passbooks are compressed
diaries.  She banks at Silvester's.  I have glanced over her account.
The last check but one paid her bill at Lausanne, but it was a large
one and probably left her with cash in hand.  Only one check has been
drawn since."

"To whom, and where?"

"To Miss Marie Devine.  There is nothing to show where the check was
drawn.  It was cashed at the Credit Lyonnais at Montpellier less than
three weeks ago.  The sum was fifty pounds."

"And who is Miss Marie Devine?"

"That also I have been able to discover.  Miss Marie Devine was the
maid of Lady Frances Carfax.  Why she should have paid her this check
we have not yet determined. I have no doubt, however, that your
researches will soon clear the matter up."

"MY researches!"

"Hence the health-giving expedition to Lausanne.  You know that I
cannot possibly leave London while old Abrahams is in such mortal
terror of his life.  Besides, on general principles it is best that I
should not leave the country.  Scotland Yard feels lonely without me,
and it causes an unhealthy excitement among the criminal classes.  Go,
then, my dear Watson, and if my humble counsel can ever be valued at so
extravagant a rate as two pence a word, it waits your disposal night
and day at the end of the Continental wire."

Two days later found me at the Hotel National at Lausanne, where I
received every courtesy at the hands of M. Moser, the well-known
manager.  Lady Frances, as he informed me, had stayed there for several
weeks.  She had been much liked by all who met her. Her age was not
more than forty.  She was still handsome and bore every sign of having
in her youth been a very lovely woman.  M. Moser knew nothing of any
valuable jewellery, but it had been remarked by the servants that the
heavy trunk in the lady's bedroom was always scrupulously locked.
Marie Devine, the maid, was as popular as her mistress.  She was
actually engaged to one of the head waiters in the hotel, and there was
no difficulty in getting her address.  It was 11 Rue de Trajan,
Montpellier.  All this I jotted down and felt that Holmes himself could
not have been more adroit in collecting his facts.

Only one corner still remained in the shadow.  No light which I
possessed could clear up the cause for the lady's sudden departure.
She was very happy at Lausanne.  There was every reason to believe that
she intended to remain for the season in her luxurious rooms
overlooking the lake.  And yet she had left at a single day's notice,
which involved her in the useless payment of a week's rent.  Only Jules
Vibart, the lover of the maid, had any suggestion to offer.  He
connected the sudden departure with the visit to the hotel a day or two
before of a tall, dark, bearded man.  "Un sauvage--un veritable
sauvage!" cried Jules Vibart.  The man had rooms somewhere in the town.
He had been seen talking earnestly to Madame on the promenade by the
lake.  Then he had called.  She had refused to see him.  He was
English, but of his name there was no record.  Madame had left the
place immediately afterwards.  Jules Vibart, and, what was of more
importance, Jules Vibart's sweetheart, thought that this call and the
departure were cause and effect.  Only one thing Jules would not
discuss.  That was the reason why Marie had left her mistress.  Of that
he could or would say nothing.  If I wished to know, I must go to
Montpellier and ask her.

So ended the first chapter of my inquiry.  The second was devoted to
the place which Lady Frances Carfax had sought when she left Lausanne.
Concerning this there had been some secrecy, which confirmed the idea
that she had gone with the intention of throwing someone off her track.
Otherwise why should not her luggage have been openly labelled for
Baden?  Both she and it reached the Rhenish spa by some circuitous
route.  This much I gathered from the manager of Cook's local office.
So to Baden I went, after dispatching to Holmes an account of all my
proceedings and receiving in reply a telegram of half-humorous
commendation.


