"Well, well, we score over you for once, Mr. Holmes.  You must give us
best this time."  He struck his stick sharply upon the ground, on which
a cabman, his whip in his hand, sauntered over from a four-wheeler
which stood on the far side of the street. "May I introduce you to Mr.
Sherlock Holmes?" he said to the cabman.  "This is Mr. Leverton, of
Pinkerton's American Agency."

"The hero of the Long Island cave mystery?" said Holmes.  "Sir, I am
pleased to meet you."

The American, a quiet, businesslike young man, with a clean-shaven,
hatchet face, flushed up at the words of commendation. "I am on the
trail of my life now, Mr. Holmes," said he.  "If I can get Gorgiano--"

"What!  Gorgiano of the Red Circle?"

"Oh, he has a European fame, has he?  Well, we've learned all about him
in America.  We KNOW he is at the bottom of fifty murders, and yet we
have nothing positive we can take him on.  I tracked him over from New
York, and I've been close to him for a week in London, waiting some
excuse to get my hand on his collar. Mr. Gregson and I ran him to
ground in that big tenement house, and there's only one door, so he
can't slip us.  There's three folk come out since he went in, but I'll
swear he wasn't one of them."

"Mr. Holmes talks of signals," said Gregson.  "I expect, as usual, he
knows a good deal that we don't."

In a few clear words Holmes explained the situation as it had appeared
to us.  The American struck his hands together with vexation.

"He's on to us!" he cried.

"Why do you think so?"

"Well, it figures out that way, does it not?  Here he is, sending out
messages to an accomplice--there are several of his gang in London.
Then suddenly, just as by your own account he was telling them that
there was danger, he broke short off.  What could it mean except that
from the window he had suddenly either caught sight of us in the
street, or in some way come to understand how close the danger was, and
that he must act right away if he was to avoid it?  What do you
suggest, Mr. Holmes?"

"That we go up at once and see for ourselves."

"But we have no warrant for his arrest."

"He is in unoccupied premises under suspicious circumstances," said
Gregson.  "That is good enough for the moment.  When we have him by the
heels we can see if New York can't help us to keep him.  I'll take the
responsibility of arresting him now."

Our official detectives may blunder in the matter of intelligence, but
never in that of courage.  Gregson climbed the stair to arrest this
desperate murderer with the same absolutely quiet and businesslike
bearing with which he would have ascended the official staircase of
Scotland Yard.  The Pinkerton man had tried to push past him, but
Gregson had firmly elbowed him back. London dangers were the privilege
of the London force.

The door of the left-hand flat upon the third landing was standing
ajar.  Gregson pushed it open.  Within all was absolute silence and
darkness.  I struck a match and lit the detective's lantern.  As I did
so, and as the flicker steadied into a flame, we all gave a gasp of
surprise.  On the deal boards of the carpetless floor there was
outlined a fresh track of blood.  The red steps pointed towards us and
led away from an inner room, the door of which was closed.  Gregson
flung it open and held his light full blaze in front of him, while we
all peered eagerly over his shoulders.

In the middle of the floor of the empty room was huddled the figure of
an enormous man, his clean-shaven, swarthy face grotesquely horrible in
its contortion and his head encircled by a ghastly crimson halo of
blood, lying in a broad wet circle upon the white woodwork.  His knees
were drawn up, his hands thrown out in agony, and from the centre of
his broad, brown, upturned throat there projected the white haft of a
knife driven blade-deep into his body.  Giant as he was, the man must
have gone down like a pole-axed ox before that terrific blow.  Beside
his right hand a most formidable horn-handled, two-edged dagger lay
upon the floor, and near it a black kid glove.

"By George! it's Black Gorgiano himself!" cried the American detective.
"Someone has got ahead of us this time."


