"You did excellently well.  What happened next?"

"The woman came out, but I had hid myself in a doorway.  Her suspicions
had been aroused, I think, for she looked round her. Then she called a
cab and got in.  I was lucky enough to get another and so to follow
her.  She got down at last at No. 36, Poultney Square, Brixton.  I
drove past, left my cab at the corner of the square, and watched the
house."

"Did you see anyone?"

"The windows were all in darkness save one on the lower floor. The
blind was down, and I could not see in.  I was standing there,
wondering what I should do next, when a covered van drove up with two
men in it.  They descended, took something out of the van, and carried
it up the steps to the hall door.  Mr. Holmes, it was a coffin."

"Ah!"

"For an instant I was on the point of rushing in.  The door had been
opened to admit the men and their burden. It was the woman who had
opened it.  But as I stood there she caught a glimpse of me, and I
think that she recognized me.  I saw her start, and she hastily closed
the door. I remembered my promise to you, and here I am."

"You have done excellent work," said Holmes, scribbling a few words
upon a half-sheet of paper.  "We can do nothing legal without a
warrant, and you can serve the cause best by taking this note down to
the authorities and getting one.  There may be some difficulty, but I
should think that the sale of the jewellery should be sufficient.
Lestrade will see to all details."

"But they may murder her in the meanwhile.  What could the coffin mean,
and for whom could it be but for her?"

"We will do all that can be done, Mr. Green.  Not a moment will be
lost.  Leave it in our hands.  Now Watson," he added as our client
hurried away, "he will set the regular forces on the move. We are, as
usual, the irregulars, and we must take our own line of action.  The
situation strikes me as so desperate that the most extreme measures are
justified.  Not a moment is to be lost in getting to Poultney Square.

"Let us try to reconstruct the situation," said he as we drove swiftly
past the Houses of Parliament and over Westminster Bridge.  "These
villains have coaxed this unhappy lady to London, after first
alienating her from her faithful maid.  If she has written any letters
they have been intercepted.  Through some confederate they have engaged
a furnished house.  Once inside it, they have made her a prisoner, and
they have become possessed of the valuable jewellery which has been
their object from the first.  Already they have begun to sell part of
it, which seems safe enough to them, since they have no reason to think
that anyone is interested in the lady's fate.  When she is released she
will, of course, denounce them.  Therefore, she must not be released.
But they cannot keep her under lock and key forever. So murder is their
only solution."

"That seems very clear."

"Now we will take another line of reasoning.  When you follow two
separate chains of thought, Watson, you will find some point of
intersection which should approximate to the truth.  We will start now,
not from the lady but from the coffin and argue backward.  That
incident proves, I fear, beyond all doubt that the lady is dead.  It
points also to an orthodox burial with proper accompaniment of medical
certificate and official sanction.  Had the lady been obviously
murdered, they would have buried her in a hole in the back garden.  But
here all is open and regular.  What does this mean?  Surely that they
have done her to death in some way which has deceived the doctor and
simulated a natural end--poisoning, perhaps.  And yet how strange that
they should ever let a doctor approach her unless he were a
confederate, which is hardly a credible proposition."

"Could they have forged a medical certificate?"

"Dangerous, Watson, very dangerous.  No, I hardly see them doing that.
Pull up, cabby!  This is evidently the undertaker's, for we have just
passed the pawnbroker's.  Would you go in, Watson?  Your appearance
inspires confidence.  Ask what hour the Poultney Square funeral takes
place to-morrow."

The woman in the shop answered me without hesitation that it was to be
at eight o'clock in the morning.  "You see, Watson, no mystery;
everything above-board!  In some way the legal forms have undoubtedly
been complied with, and they think that they have little to fear.
Well, there's nothing for it now but a direct frontal attack.  Are you
armed?"

"My stick!"


