"Ah! that's what we want to know!  It was this morning, sir.  Mr.
Warren is a timekeeper at Morton and Waylight's, in Tottenham Court
Road.  He has to be out of the house before seven. Well, this morning
he had not gone ten paces down the road when two men came up behind
him, threw a coat over his head, and bundled him into a cab that was
beside the curb.  They drove him an hour, and then opened the door and
shot him out.  He lay in the roadway so shaken in his wits that he
never saw what became of the cab. When he picked himself up he found he
was on Hampstead Heath; so he took a bus home, and there he lies now on
his sofa, while I came straight round to tell you what had happened."

"Most interesting," said Holmes.  "Did he observe the appearance of
these men--did he hear them talk?"

"No; he is clean dazed.  He just knows that he was lifted up as if by
magic and dropped as if by magic. Two a least were in it, and maybe
three."

"And you connect this attack with your lodger?"

"Well, we've lived there fifteen years and no such happenings ever came
before.  I've had enough of him.  Money's not everything. I'll have him
out of my house before the day is done."

"Wait a bit, Mrs. Warren.  Do nothing rash. I begin to think that this
affair may be very much more important than appeared at first sight.
It is clear now that some danger is threatening your lodger.  It is
equally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near your door,
mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light.  On
discovering their mistake they released him. What they would have done
had it not been a mistake, we can only conjecture."

"Well, what am I to do, Mr. Holmes?"

"I have a great fancy to see this lodger of yours, Mrs. Warren."

"I don't see how that is to be managed, unless you break in the door.
I always hear him unlock it as I go down the stair after I leave the
tray."

"He has to take the tray in.  Surely we could conceal ourselves and see
him do it."

The landlady thought for a moment.

"Well, sir, there's the box-room opposite.  I could arrange a
looking-glass, maybe, and if you were behind the door--"

"Excellent!" said Holmes.  "When does he lunch?"

"About one, sir."

"Then Dr. Watson and I will come round in time.  For the present, Mrs.
Warren, good-bye."

At half-past twelve we found ourselves upon the steps of Mrs. Warren's
house--a high, thin, yellow-brick edifice in Great Orme Street, a
narrow thoroughfare at the northeast side of the British Museum.
Standing as it does near the corner of the street,  it commands a view
down Howe Street, with its ore pretentious houses.  Holmes pointed with
a chuckle to one of these, a row of residential flats, which projected
so that they could not fail to catch the eye.

"See, Watson!" said he.  "'High red house with stone facings.' There is
the signal station all right.  We know the place, and we know the code;
so surely our task should be simple.  There's a 'to let' card in that
window.  It is evidently an empty flat to which the confederate has
access.  Well, Mrs. Warren, what now?"

"I have it all ready for you.  If you will both come up and leave your
boots below on the landing, I'll put you there now."

It was an excellent hiding-plate which she had arranged.  The mirror
was so placed that, seated in the dark, we could very plainly see the
door opposite.  We had hardly settled down in it, and Mrs. Warren left
us, when a distant tinkle announced that our mysterious neighbour had
rung.  Presently the landlady appeared with the tray, laid it down upon
a chair beside the closed door, and then, treading heavily, departed.
Crouching together in the angle of the door, we kept our eyes fixed
upon the mirror. Suddenly, as the landlady's footsteps died away, there
was the creak of a turning key, the handle revolved, and two thin hands
darted out and lifted the tray form the chair.  An instant later it was
hurriedly replaced, and I caught a glimpse of a dark, beautiful,
horrified face glaring at the narrow opening of the box-room.  Then the
door crashed to, the key turned once more, and all was silence. Holmes
twitched my sleeve, and together we stole down the stair.


