A sergeant and a constable stood in the doorway.  Holmes drew his card
from his case.

"This is my name and address.  This is my friend, Dr. Watson."

"Bless you, sir, we know you very well," said the sergeant, "but you
can't stay here without a warrant."

"Of course not.  I quite understand that."

"Arrest him!" cried Peters.

"We know where to lay our hands on this gentleman if he is wanted,"
said the sergeant majestically, "but you'll have to go, Mr. Holmes."

"Yes, Watson, we shall have to go."

A minute later we were in the street once more.  Holmes was as cool as
ever, but I was hot with anger and humiliation.  The sergeant had
followed us.

"Sorry, Mr. Holmes, but that's the law."

"Exactly, Sergeant, you could not do otherwise."

"I expect there was good reason for your presence there.  If there is
anything I can do--"

"It's a missing lady, Sergeant, and we think she is in that house.  I
expect a warrant presently."

"Then I'll keep my eye on the parties, Mr. Holmes.  If anything comes
along, I will surely let you know."

It was only nine o'clock, and we were off full cry upon the trail at
once.  First we drove to Brixton Workhoused Infirmary, where we found
that it was indeed the truth that a charitable couple had called some
days before, that they had claimed an imbecile old woman as a former
servant, and that they had obtained permission to take her away with
them.  No surprise was expressed at the news that she had since died.

The doctor was our next goal.  He had been called in, had found the
woman dying of pure senility, had actually seen her pass away, and had
signed the certificate in due form.  "I assure you that everything was
perfectly normal and there was no room for foul play in the matter,"
said he. Nothing in the house had struck him as suspicious save that
for people of their class it was remarkable that they should have no
servant.  So far and no further went the doctor.

Finally we found our way to Scotland Yard.  There had been difficulties
of procedure in regard to the warrant.  Some delay was inevitable.  The
magistrate's signature might not be obtained until next morning.  If
Holmes would call about nine he could go down with Lestrade and see it
acted upon.  So ended the day, save that near midnight our friend, the
sergeant, called to say that he had seen flickering lights here and
there in the windows of the great dark house, but that no one had left
it and none had entered.  We could but pray for patience and wait for
the morrow.

Sherlock Holmes was too irritable for conversation and too restless for
sleep.  I left him smoking hard, with his heavy, dark brows knotted
together, and his long, nervous fingers tapping upon the arms of his
chair, as he turned over in his mind every possible solution of the
mystery.  Several times in the course of the night I heard him prowling
about the house. Finally, just after I had been called in the morning,
he rushed into my room.  He was in his dressing-gown, but his pale,
hollow-eyed face told me that his night had been a sleepless one.

"What time was the funeral?  Eight, was it not?" he asked eagerly.
"Well, it is 7:20 now.  Good heavens, Watson, what has become of any
brains that God has given me?  Quick, man, quick! It's life or death--a
hundred chances on death to one on life. I'll never forgive myself,
never, if we are too late!"

Five minutes had not passed before we were flying in a hansom down
Baker Street.  But even so it was twenty-five to eight as we passed Big
Ben, and eight struck as we tore down the Brixton Road.  But others
were late as well as we.  Ten minutes after the hour the hearse was
still standing at the door of the house, and even as our foaming horse
came to a halt the coffin, supported by three men, appeared on the
threshold.  Holmes darted forward and barred their way.


