"Swaffer would be called eccentric were he not so much respected. They
will tell you that Mr. Swaffer sits up as late as ten o'clock at night
to read books, and they will tell you also that he can write a cheque
for two hundred pounds without thinking twice about it. He himself would
tell you that the Swaffers had owned land between this and Darnford for
these three hundred years. He must be eighty-five to-day, but he does
not look a bit older than when I first came here. He is a great breeder
of sheep, and deals extensively in cattle. He attends market days for
miles around in every sort of weather, and drives sitting bowed low over
the reins, his lank grey hair curling over the collar of his warm coat,
and with a green plaid rug round his legs. The calmness of advanced age
gives a solemnity to his manner. He is clean-shaved; his lips are thin
and sensitive; something rigid and monarchal in the set of his features
lends a certain elevation to the character of his face. He has been
known to drive miles in the rain to see a new kind of rose in somebody's
garden, or a monstrous cabbage grown by a cottager. He loves to hear
tell of or to be shown something that he calls 'outlandish.' Perhaps it
was just that outlandishness of the man which influenced old Swaffer.
Perhaps it was only an inexplicable caprice. All I know is that at
the end of three weeks I caught sight of Smith's lunatic digging in
Swaffer's kitchen garden. They had found out he could use a spade. He
dug barefooted.

"His black hair flowed over his shoulders. I suppose it was Swaffer
who had given him the striped old cotton shirt; but he wore still the
national brown cloth trousers (in which he had been washed ashore)
fitting to the leg almost like tights; was belted with a broad leathern
belt studded with little brass discs; and had never yet ventured into
the village. The land he looked upon seemed to him kept neatly, like the
grounds round a landowner's house; the size of the cart-horses struck
him with astonishment; the roads resembled garden walks, and the aspect
of the people, especially on Sundays, spoke of opulence. He wondered
what made them so hardhearted and their children so bold. He got
his food at the back door, carried it in both hands carefully to his
outhouse, and, sitting alone on his pallet, would make the sign of the
cross before he began. Beside the same pallet, kneeling in the early
darkness of the short days, he recited aloud the Lord's Prayer before he
slept. Whenever he saw old Swaffer he would bow with veneration from
the waist, and stand erect while the old man, with his fingers over his
upper lip, surveyed him silently. He bowed also to Miss Swaffer, who
kept house frugally for her father--a broad-shouldered, big-boned woman
of forty-five, with the pocket of her dress full of keys, and a grey,
steady eye. She was Church--as people said (while her father was one of
the trustees of the Baptist Chapel)--and wore a little steel cross
at her waist. She dressed severely in black, in memory of one of the
innumerable Bradleys of the neighbourhood, to whom she had been engaged
some twenty-five years ago--a young farmer who broke his neck out
hunting on the eve of the wedding day. She had the unmoved countenance
of the deaf, spoke very seldom, and her lips, thin like her father's,
astonished one sometimes by a mysteriously ironic curl.

"These were the people to whom he owed allegiance, and an overwhelming
loneliness seemed to fall from the leaden sky of that winter without
sunshine. All the faces were sad. He could talk to no one, and had no
hope of ever understanding anybody. It was as if these had been the
faces of people from the other world--dead people--he used to tell me
years afterwards. Upon my word, I wonder he did not go mad. He didn't
know where he was. Somewhere very far from his mountains--somewhere over
the water. Was this America, he wondered?

"If it hadn't been for the steel cross at Miss Swaffer's belt he would
not, he confessed, have known whether he was in a Christian country at
all. He used to cast stealthy glances at it, and feel comforted. There
was nothing here the same as in his country! The earth and the water
were different; there were no images of the Redeemer by the roadside.
The very grass was different, and the trees. All the trees but the three
old Norway pines on the bit of lawn before Swaffer's house, and these
reminded him of his country. He had been detected once, after dusk, with
his forehead against the trunk of one of them, sobbing, and talking to
himself. They had been like brothers to him at that time, he affirmed.
Everything else was strange. Conceive you the kind of an existence
overshadowed, oppressed, by the everyday material appearances, as if by
the visions of a nightmare. At night, when he could not sleep, he kept
on thinking of the girl who gave him the first piece of bread he had
eaten in this foreign land. She had been neither fierce nor angry,
nor frightened. Her face he remembered as the only comprehensible face
amongst all these faces that were as closed, as mysterious, and as mute
as the faces of the dead who are possessed of a knowledge beyond
the comprehension of the living. I wonder whether the memory of her
compassion prevented him from cutting his throat. But there! I suppose I
am an old sentimentalist, and forget the instinctive love of life which
it takes all the strength of an uncommon despair to overcome.

"He did the work which was given him with an intelligence which
surprised old Swaffer. By-and-by it was discovered that he could help
at the ploughing, could milk the cows, feed the bullocks in the
cattle-yard, and was of some use with the sheep. He began to pick up
words, too, very fast; and suddenly, one fine morning in spring, he
rescued from an untimely death a grand-child of old Swaffer.


