"Yanko was in great trouble meantime. In his country you get an old man
for an ambassador in marriage affairs. He did not know how to proceed.
However, one day in the midst of sheep in a field (he was now Swaffer's
under-shepherd with Foster) he took off his hat to the father and
declared himself humbly. 'I daresay she's fool enough to marry you,' was
all Foster said. 'And then,' he used to relate, 'he puts his hat on his
head, looks black at me as if he wanted to cut my throat, whistles
the dog, and off he goes, leaving me to do the work.' The Fosters, of
course, didn't like to lose the wages the girl earned: Amy used to give
all her money to her mother. But there was in Foster a very genuine
aversion to that match. He contended that the fellow was very good with
sheep, but was not fit for any girl to marry. For one thing, he used
to go along the hedges muttering to himself like a dam' fool; and then,
these foreigners behave very queerly to women sometimes. And perhaps he
would want to carry her off somewhere--or run off himself. It was not
safe. He preached it to his daughter that the fellow might ill-use her
in some way. She made no answer. It was, they said in the village, as if
the man had done something to her. People discussed the matter. It was
quite an excitement, and the two went on 'walking out' together in the
face of opposition. Then something unexpected happened.

"I don't know whether old Swaffer ever understood how much he was
regarded in the light of a father by his foreign retainer. Anyway the
relation was curiously feudal. So when Yanko asked formally for an
interview--'and the Miss too' (he called the severe, deaf Miss Swaffer
simply _Miss_)--it was to obtain their permission to marry.
Swaffer heard him unmoved, dismissed him by a nod, and then shouted the
intelligence into Miss Swaffer's best ear. She showed no surprise, and
only remarked grimly, in a veiled blank voice, 'He certainly won't get
any other girl to marry him.'

"It is Miss Swaffer who has all the credit of the munificence: but in
a very few days it came out that Mr. Swaffer had presented Yanko with
a cottage (the cottage you've seen this morning) and something like an
acre of ground--had made it over to him in absolute property. Willcox
expedited the deed, and I remember him telling me he had a great
pleasure in making it ready. It recited: 'In consideration of saving the
life of my beloved grandchild, Bertha Willcox.'

"Of course, after that no power on earth could prevent them from getting
married.

"Her infatuation endured. People saw her going out to meet him in the
evening. She stared with unblinking, fascinated eyes up the road where
he was expected to appear, walking freely, with a swing from the hip,
and humming one of the love-tunes of his country. When the boy was born,
he got elevated at the 'Coach and Horses,' essayed again a song and a
dance, and was again ejected. People expressed their commiseration for
a woman married to that Jack-in-the-box. He didn't care. There was a
man now (he told me boastfully) to whom he could sing and talk in the
language of his country, and show how to dance by-and-by.

"But I don't know. To me he appeared to have grown less springy of step,
heavier in body, less keen of eye. Imagination, no doubt; but it seems
to me now as if the net of fate had been drawn closer round him already.

"One day I met him on the footpath over the Talfourd Hill. He told me
that 'women were funny.' I had heard already of domestic differences.
People were saying that Amy Foster was beginning to find out what
sort of man she had married. He looked upon the sea with indifferent,
unseeing eyes. His wife had snatched the child out of his arms one day
as he sat on the doorstep crooning to it a song such as the mothers sing
to babies in his mountains. She seemed to think he was doing it some
harm. Women are funny. And she had objected to him praying aloud in the
evening. Why? He expected the boy to repeat the prayer aloud after him
by-and-by, as he used to do after his old father when he was a child--in
his own country. And I discovered he longed for their boy to grow up so
that he could have a man to talk with in that language that to our
ears sounded so disturbing, so passionate, and so bizarre. Why his wife
should dislike the idea he couldn't tell. But that would pass, he said.
And tilting his head knowingly, he tapped his breastbone to indicate
that she had a good heart: not hard, not fierce, open to compassion,
charitable to the poor!


