"Smith is notoriously hot-tempered, but the sight of some nondescript
and miry creature sitting cross-legged amongst a lot of loose straw, and
swinging itself to and fro like a bear in a cage, made him pause. Then
this tramp stood up silently before him, one mass of mud and filth from
head to foot. Smith, alone amongst his stacks with this apparition, in
the stormy twilight ringing with the infuriated barking of the dog, felt
the dread of an inexplicable strangeness. But when that being, parting
with his black hands the long matted locks that hung before his face, as
you part the two halves of a curtain, looked out at him with glistening,
wild, black-and-white eyes, the weirdness of this silent encounter
fairly staggered him. He had admitted since (for the story has been a
legitimate subject of conversation about here for years) that he made
more than one step backwards. Then a sudden burst of rapid, senseless
speech persuaded him at once that he had to do with an escaped lunatic.
In fact, that impression never wore off completely. Smith has not in his
heart given up his secret conviction of the man's essential insanity to
this very day.

"As the creature approached him, jabbering in a most discomposing
manner, Smith (unaware that he was being addressed as 'gracious lord,'
and adjured in God's name to afford food and shelter) kept on speaking
firmly but gently to it, and retreating all the time into the other
yard. At last, watching his chance, by a sudden charge he bundled him
headlong into the wood-lodge, and instantly shot the bolt. Thereupon
he wiped his brow, though the day was cold. He had done his duty to
the community by shutting up a wandering and probably dangerous maniac.
Smith isn't a hard man at all, but he had room in his brain only for
that one idea of lunacy. He was not imaginative enough to ask himself
whether the man might not be perishing with cold and hunger. Meantime,
at first, the maniac made a great deal of noise in the lodge. Mrs. Smith
was screaming upstairs, where she had locked herself in her bedroom; but
Amy Foster sobbed piteously at the kitchen door, wringing her hands and
muttering, 'Don't! don't!' I daresay Smith had a rough time of it that
evening with one noise and another, and this insane, disturbing voice
crying obstinately through the door only added to his irritation. He
couldn't possibly have connected this troublesome lunatic with the
sinking of a ship in Eastbay, of which there had been a rumour in the
Darnford marketplace. And I daresay the man inside had been very near
to insanity on that night. Before his excitement collapsed and he became
unconscious he was throwing himself violently about in the dark, rolling
on some dirty sacks, and biting his fists with rage, cold, hunger,
amazement, and despair.

"He was a mountaineer of the eastern range of the Carpathians, and the
vessel sunk the night before in Eastbay was the Hamburg emigrant-ship
_Herzogin Sophia-Dorothea_, of appalling memory.

"A few months later we could read in the papers the accounts of the
bogus 'Emigration Agencies' among the Sclavonian peasantry in the more
remote provinces of Austria. The object of these scoundrels was to get
hold of the poor ignorant people's homesteads, and they were in league
with the local usurers. They exported their victims through Hamburg
mostly. As to the ship, I had watched her out of this very window,
reaching close-hauled under short canvas into the bay on a dark,
threatening afternoon. She came to an anchor, correctly by the chart,
off the Brenzett Coastguard station. I remember before the night fell
looking out again at the outlines of her spars and rigging that stood
out dark and pointed on a background of ragged, slaty clouds like
another and a slighter spire to the left of the Brenzett church-tower.
In the evening the wind rose. At midnight I could hear in my bed the
terrific gusts and the sounds of a driving deluge.

"About that time the Coastguardmen thought they saw the lights of a
steamer over the anchoring-ground. In a moment they vanished; but it is
clear that another vessel of some sort had tried for shelter in the
bay on that awful, blind night, had rammed the German ship amidships (a
breach--as one of the divers told me afterwards--'that you could sail
a Thames barge through'), and then had gone out either scathless or
damaged, who shall say; but had gone out, unknown, unseen, and fatal, to
perish mysteriously at sea. Of her nothing ever came to light, and yet
the hue and cry that was raised all over the world would have found her
out if she had been in existence anywhere on the face of the waters.


