In the atmosphere of the Easterly weather, as pellucid as a piece
of crystal and refracting like a prism, we could see the appalling
numbers of our helpless company, even to those who in more normal
conditions would have remained invisible, sails down under the
horizon.  It is the malicious pleasure of the East Wind to augment
the power of your eyesight, in order, perhaps, that you should see
better the perfect humiliation, the hopeless character of your
captivity.  Easterly weather is generally clear, and that is all
that can be said for it--almost supernaturally clear when it likes;
but whatever its mood, there is something uncanny in its nature.
Its duplicity is such that it will deceive a scientific instrument.
No barometer will give warning of an easterly gale, were it ever so
wet.  It would be an unjust and ungrateful thing to say that a
barometer is a stupid contrivance.  It is simply that the wiles of
the East Wind are too much for its fundamental honesty.  After
years and years of experience the most trusty instrument of the
sort that ever went to sea screwed on to a ship's cabin bulkhead
will, almost invariably, be induced to rise by the diabolic
ingenuity of the Easterly weather, just at the moment when the
Easterly weather, discarding its methods of hard, dry, impassive
cruelty, contemplates drowning what is left of your spirit in
torrents of a peculiarly cold and horrid rain.  The sleet-and-hail
squalls following the lightning at the end of a westerly gale are
cold and benumbing and stinging and cruel enough.  But the dry,
Easterly weather, when it turns to wet, seems to rain poisoned
showers upon your head.  It is a sort of steady, persistent,
overwhelming, endlessly driving downpour, which makes your heart
sick, and opens it to dismal forebodings.  And the stormy mood of
the Easterly weather looms black upon the sky with a peculiar and
amazing blackness.  The West Wind hangs heavy gray curtains of mist
and spray before your gaze, but the Eastern interloper of the
narrow seas, when he has mustered his courage and cruelty to the
point of a gale, puts your eyes out, puts them out completely,
makes you feel blind for life upon a lee-shore.  It is the wind,
also, that brings snow.

Out of his black and merciless heart he flings a white blinding
sheet upon the ships of the sea.  He has more manners of villainy,
and no more conscience than an Italian prince of the seventeenth
century.  His weapon is a dagger carried under a black cloak when
he goes out on his unlawful enterprises.  The mere hint of his
approach fills with dread every craft that swims the sea, from
fishing-smacks to four-masted ships that recognise the sway of the
West Wind.  Even in his most accommodating mood he inspires a dread
of treachery.  I have heard upwards of ten score of windlasses
spring like one into clanking life in the dead of night, filling
the Downs with a panic-struck sound of anchors being torn hurriedly
out of the ground at the first breath of his approach.
Fortunately, his heart often fails him:  he does not always blow
home upon our exposed coast; he has not the fearless temper of his
Westerly brother.

The natures of those two winds that share the dominions of the
great oceans are fundamentally different.  It is strange that the
winds which men are prone to style capricious remain true to their
character in all the various regions of the earth.  To us here, for
instance, the East Wind comes across a great continent, sweeping
over the greatest body of solid land upon this earth.  For the
Australian east coast the East Wind is the wind of the ocean,
coming across the greatest body of water upon the globe; and yet
here and there its characteristics remain the same with a strange
consistency in everything that is vile and base.  The members of
the West Wind's dynasty are modified in a way by the regions they
rule, as a Hohenzollern, without ceasing to be himself, becomes a
Roumanian by virtue of his throne, or a Saxe-Coburg learns to put
the dress of Bulgarian phrases upon his particular thoughts,
whatever they are.

The autocratic sway of the West Wind, whether forty north or forty
south of the Equator, is characterized by an open, generous, frank,
barbarous recklessness.  For he is a great autocrat, and to be a
great autocrat you must be a great barbarian.  I have been too much
moulded to his sway to nurse now any idea of rebellion in my heart.
Moreover, what is a rebellion within the four walls of a room
against the tempestuous rule of the West Wind?  I remain faithful
to the memory of the mighty King with a double-edged sword in one
hand, and in the other holding out rewards of great daily runs and
famously quick passages to those of his courtiers who knew how to
wait watchfully for every sign of his secret mood.  As we deep-
water men always reckoned, he made one year in three fairly lively
for anybody having business upon the Atlantic or down there along
the "forties" of the Southern Ocean.  You had to take the bitter
with the sweet; and it cannot be denied he played carelessly with
our lives and fortunes.  But, then, he was always a great king, fit
to rule over the great waters where, strictly speaking, a man would
have no business whatever but for his audacity.


