The position had its drawbacks, however.  One wintry, blustering,
dark night in July, as I stood sleepily out of the rain under the
break of the poop something resembling an ostrich dashed up the
gangway.  I say ostrich because the creature, though it ran on two
legs, appeared to help its progress by working a pair of short
wings; it was a man, however, only his coat, ripped up the back and
flapping in two halves above his shoulders, gave him that weird and
fowl-like appearance.  At least, I suppose it was his coat, for it
was impossible to make him out distinctly.  How he managed to come
so straight upon me, at speed and without a stumble over a strange
deck, I cannot imagine.  He must have been able to see in the dark
better than any cat.  He overwhelmed me with panting entreaties to
let him take shelter till morning in our forecastle.  Following my
strict orders, I refused his request, mildly at first, in a sterner
tone as he insisted with growing impudence.

"For God's sake let me, matey!  Some of 'em are after me--and I've
got hold of a ticker here."

"You clear out of this!" I said.

"Don't be hard on a chap, old man!" he whined pitifully.

"Now then, get ashore at once.  Do you hear?"

Silence.  He appeared to cringe, mute, as if words had failed him
through grief; then--bang! came a concussion and a great flash of
light in which he vanished, leaving me prone on my back with the
most abominable black eye that anybody ever got in the faithful
discharge of duty.  Shadows!  Shadows!  I hope he escaped the
enemies he was fleeing from to live and flourish to this day.  But
his fist was uncommonly hard and his aim miraculously true in the
dark.

There were other experiences, less painful and more funny for the
most part, with one amongst them of a dramatic complexion; but the
greatest experience of them all was Mr. B-, our chief mate himself.

He used to go ashore every night to foregather in some hotel's
parlour with his crony, the mate of the barque Cicero, lying on the
other side of the Circular Quay.  Late at night I would hear from
afar their stumbling footsteps and their voices raised in endless
argument.  The mate of the Cicero was seeing his friend on board.
They would continue their senseless and muddled discourse in tones
of profound friendship for half an hour or so at the shore end of
our gangway, and then I would hear Mr. B- insisting that he must
see the other on board his ship.  And away they would go, their
voices, still conversing with excessive amity, being heard moving
all round the harbour.  It happened more than once that they would
thus perambulate three or four times the distance, each seeing the
other on board his ship out of pure and disinterested affection.
Then, through sheer weariness, or perhaps in a moment of
forgetfulness, they would manage to part from each other somehow,
and by-and-by the planks of our long gangway would bend and creak
under the weight of Mr. B- coming on board for good at last.

On the rail his burly form would stop and stand swaying.

