LUCKILY, just before night, all four of us had lashed ourselves firmly
to the fragments of the windlass, lying in this manner as flat upon the
deck as possible. This precaution alone saved us from destruction. As
it was, we were all more or less stunned by the immense weight of water
which tumbled upon us, and which did not roll from above us until we
were nearly exhausted. As soon as I could recover breath, I called aloud
to my companions. Augustus alone replied, saying: "It is all over with
us, and may God have mercy upon our souls!" By-and-by both the others
were enabled to speak, when they exhorted us to take courage, as there
was still hope; it being impossible, from the nature of the cargo, that
the brig could go down, and there being every chance that the gale would
blow over by the morning. These words inspired me with new life; for,
strange as it may seem, although it was obvious that a vessel with a
cargo of empty oil-casks would not sink, I had been hitherto so confused
in mind as to have overlooked this consideration altogether; and the
danger which I had for some time regarded as the most imminent was
that of foundering. As hope revived within me, I made use of every
opportunity to strengthen the lashings which held me to the remains
of the windlass, and in this occupation I soon discovered that my
companions were also busy. The night was as dark as it could possibly
be, and the horrible shrieking din and confusion which surrounded us it
is useless to attempt describing. Our deck lay level with the sea, or
rather we were encircled with a towering ridge of foam, a portion of
which swept over us even instant. It is not too much to say that our
heads were not fairly out of the water more than one second in three.
Although we lay close together, no one of us could see the other,
or, indeed, any portion of the brig itself, upon which we were so
tempestuously hurled about. At intervals we called one to the other,
thus endeavouring to keep alive hope, and render consolation and
encouragement to such of us as stood most in need of it. The feeble
condition of Augustus made him an object of solicitude with us all; and
as, from the lacerated condition of his right arm, it must have been
impossible for him to secure his lashings with any degree of
firmness, we were in momentary expectation of finding that he had gone
overboard--yet to render him aid was a thing altogether out of the
question. Fortunately, his station was more secure than that of any
of the rest of us; for the upper part of his body lying just beneath
a portion of the shattered windlass, the seas, as they tumbled in upon
him, were greatly broken in their violence. In any other situation than
this (into which he had been accidentally thrown after having lashed
himself in a very exposed spot) he must inevitably have perished before
morning. Owing to the brig's lying so much along, we were all less
liable to be washed off than otherwise would have been the case. The
heel, as I have before stated, was to larboard, about one half of the
deck being constantly under water. The seas, therefore, which struck us
to starboard were much broken, by the vessel's side, only reaching us
in fragments as we lay flat on our faces; while those which came from
larboard being what are called back-water seas, and obtaining little
hold upon us on account of our posture, had not sufficient force to drag
us from our fastenings.

In this frightful situation we lay until the day broke so as to show
us more fully the horrors which surrounded us. The brig was a mere
log, rolling about at the mercy of every wave; the gale was upon the
increase, if any thing, blowing indeed a complete hurricane, and there
appeared to us no earthly prospect of deliverance. For several hours
we held on in silence, expecting every moment that our lashings would
either give way, that the remains of the windlass would go by the board,
or that some of the huge seas, which roared in every direction around
us and above us, would drive the hulk so far beneath the water that we
should be drowned before it could regain the surface. By the mercy of
God, however, we were preserved from these imminent dangers, and about
midday were cheered by the light of the blessed sun. Shortly afterward
we could perceive a sensible diminution in the force of the wind, when,
now for the first time since the latter part of the evening before,
Augustus spoke, asking Peters, who lay closest to him, if he thought
there was any possibility of our being saved. As no reply was at first
made to this question, we all concluded that the hybrid had been drowned
where he lay; but presently, to our great joy, he spoke, although very
feebly, saying that he was in great pain, being so cut by the tightness
of his lashings across the stomach, that he must either find means of
loosening them or perish, as it was impossible that he could endure
his misery much longer. This occasioned us great distress, as it was
altogether useless to think of aiding him in any manner while the
sea continued washing over us as it did. We exhorted him to bear his
sufferings with fortitude, and promised to seize the first opportunity
which should offer itself to relieve him. He replied that it would soon
be too late; that it would be all over with him before we could help
him; and then, after moaning for some minutes, lay silent, when we
concluded that he had perished.


