But now a new horror presented itself, and one indeed sufficient to
startle the strongest nerves. My eyes, from the cruel pressure of
the machine, were absolutely starting from their sockets. While I was
thinking how I should possibly manage without them, one actually tumbled
out of my head, and, rolling down the steep side of the steeple, lodged
in the rain gutter which ran along the eaves of the main building. The
loss of the eye was not so much as the insolent air of independence and
contempt with which it regarded me after it was out. There it lay in the
gutter just under my nose, and the airs it gave itself would have been
ridiculous had they not been disgusting. Such a winking and blinking
were never before seen. This behavior on the part of my eye in the
gutter was not only irritating on account of its manifest insolence and
shameful ingratitude, but was also exceedingly inconvenient on account
of the sympathy which always exists between two eyes of the same head,
however far apart. I was forced, in a manner, to wink and to blink,
whether I would or not, in exact concert with the scoundrelly thing
that lay just under my nose. I was presently relieved, however, by the
dropping out of the other eye. In falling it took the same direction
(possibly a concerted plot) as its fellow. Both rolled out of the gutter
together, and in truth I was very glad to get rid of them.

The bar was now four inches and a half deep in my neck, and there was
only a little bit of skin to cut through. My sensations were those
of entire happiness, for I felt that in a few minutes, at farthest,
I should be relieved from my disagreeable situation. And in this
expectation I was not at all deceived. At twenty-five minutes past
five in the afternoon, precisely, the huge minute-hand had proceeded
sufficiently far on its terrible revolution to sever the small remainder
of my neck. I was not sorry to see the head which had occasioned me so
much embarrassment at length make a final separation from my body.
It first rolled down the side of the steeple, then lodge, for a few
seconds, in the gutter, and then made its way, with a plunge, into the
middle of the street.

I will candidly confess that my feelings were now of the most
singular--nay, of the most mysterious, the most perplexing and
incomprehensible character. My senses were here and there at one and the
same moment. With my head I imagined, at one time, that I, the head,
was the real Signora Psyche Zenobia--at another I felt convinced that
myself, the body, was the proper identity. To clear my ideas on this
topic I felt in my pocket for my snuff-box, but, upon getting it, and
endeavoring to apply a pinch of its grateful contents in the ordinary
manner, I became immediately aware of my peculiar deficiency, and
threw the box at once down to my head. It took a pinch with great
satisfaction, and smiled me an acknowledgement in return. Shortly
afterward it made me a speech, which I could hear but indistinctly
without ears. I gathered enough, however, to know that it was astonished
at my wishing to remain alive under such circumstances. In the
concluding sentences it quoted the noble words of Ariosto--

     Il pover hommy che non sera corty

And have a combat tenty erry morty; thus comparing me to the hero who,
in the heat of the combat, not perceiving that he was dead, continued to
contest the battle with inextinguishable valor. There was nothing now
to prevent my getting down from my elevation, and I did so. What it was
that Pompey saw so very peculiar in my appearance I have never yet been
able to find out. The fellow opened his mouth from ear to ear, and shut
his two eyes as if he were endeavoring to crack nuts between the lids.
Finally, throwing off his overcoat, he made one spring for the staircase
and disappeared. I hurled after the scoundrel these vehement words of
Demosthenes--

Andrew O'Phlegethon, you really make haste to fly, and then turned to
the darling of my heart, to the one-eyed! the shaggy-haired Diana. Alas!
what a horrible vision affronted my eyes? Was that a rat I saw skulking
into his hole? Are these the picked bones of the little angel who has
been cruelly devoured by the monster? Ye gods! and what do I behold--is
that the departed spirit, the shade, the ghost, of my beloved puppy,
which I perceive sitting with a grace so melancholy, in the corner?
Hearken! for she speaks, and, heavens! it is in the German of Schiller--


