July 25. This morning the gale had diminished to a mere ten-knot breeze,
and the sea had gone down with it so considerably that we were able to
keep ourselves dry upon the deck. To our great grief, however, we found
that two jars of our olives, as well as the whole of our ham, had been
washed overboard, in spite of the careful manner in which they had been
fastened. We determined not to kill the tortoise as yet, and contented
ourselves for the present with a breakfast on a few of the olives, and
a measure of water each, which latter we mixed half and half, with
wine, finding great relief and strength from the mixture, without the
distressing intoxication which had ensued upon drinking the port. The
sea was still far too rough for the renewal of our efforts at getting up
provision from the storeroom. Several articles, of no importance to us
in our present situation, floated up through the opening during the day,
and were immediately washed overboard. We also now observed that the
hulk lay more along than ever, so that we could not stand an instant
without lashing ourselves. On this account we passed a gloomy and
uncomfortable day. At noon the sun appeared to be nearly vertical, and
we had no doubt that we had been driven down by the long succession of
northward and northwesterly winds into the near vicinity of the equator.
Toward evening we saw several sharks, and were somewhat alarmed by the
audacious manner in which an enormously large one approached us. At one
time, a lurch throwing the deck very far beneath the water, the monster
actually swam in upon us, floundering for some moments just over the
companion-hatch, and striking Peters violently with his tail. A heavy
sea at length hurled him overboard, much to our relief. In moderate
weather we might have easily captured him.

July 26. This morning, the wind having greatly abated, and the sea not
being very rough, we determined to renew our exertions in the storeroom.
After a great deal of hard labor during the whole day, we found that
nothing further was to be expected from this quarter, the partitions of
the room having been stove during the night, and its contents swept into
the hold. This discovery, as may be supposed, filled us with despair.

July 27. The sea nearly smooth, with a light wind, and still from the
northward and westward. The sun coming out hotly in the afternoon,
we occupied ourselves in drying our clothes. Found great relief from
thirst, and much comfort otherwise, by bathing in the sea; in this,
however, we were forced to use great caution, being afraid of sharks,
several of which were seen swimming around the brig during the day.

July 28. Good weather still. The brig now began to lie along so
alarmingly that we feared she would eventually roll bottom up. Prepared
ourselves as well as we could for this emergency, lashing our tortoise,
waterjug, and two remaining jars of olives as far as possible over to
the windward, placing them outside the hull below the main-chains. The
sea very smooth all day, with little or no wind.

July 29. A continuance of the same weather. Augustus's wounded arm began
to evince symptoms of mortification. He complained of drowsiness and
excessive thirst, but no acute pain. Nothing could be done for his
relief beyond rubbing his wounds with a little of the vinegar from the
olives, and from this no benefit seemed to be experienced. We did every
thing in our power for his comfort, and trebled his allowance of water.

July 30. An excessively hot day, with no wind. An enormous shark kept
close by the hulk during the whole of the forenoon. We made several
unsuccessful attempts to capture him by means of a noose. Augustus much
worse, and evidently sinking as much from want of proper nourishment as
from the effect of his wounds. He constantly prayed to be relieved from
his sufferings, wishing for nothing but death. This evening we ate the
last of our olives, and found the water in our jug so putrid that we
could not swallow it at all without the addition of wine. Determined to
kill our tortoise in the morning.


