Finding that I could now trust my companions to hold the end of the
rope, I again made three or four plunges into the cabin, although it was
now quite dark, and a gentle but long swell from the northward rendered
the hulk somewhat unsteady. In the course of these attempts I succeeded
in bringing up two case-knives, a three-gallon jug, empty, and a
blanket, but nothing which could serve us for food. I continued my
efforts, after getting these articles, until I was completely exhausted,
but brought up nothing else. During the night Parker and Peters occupied
themselves by turns in the same manner; but nothing coming to hand, we
now gave up this attempt in despair, concluding that we were exhausting
ourselves in vain.

We passed the remainder of this night in a state of the most intense
mental and bodily anguish that can possibly be imagined. The morning of
the sixteenth at length dawned, and we looked eagerly around the horizon
for relief, but to no purpose. The sea was still smooth, with only a
long swell from the northward, as on yesterday. This was the sixth day
since we had tasted either food or drink, with the exception of the
bottle of port wine, and it was clear that we could hold out but a very
little while longer unless something could be obtained. I never saw
before, nor wish to see again, human beings so utterly emaciated as
Peters and Augustus. Had I met them on shore in their present condition
I should not have had the slightest suspicion that I had ever beheld
them. Their countenances were totally changed in character, so that I
could not bring myself to believe them really the same individuals with
whom I had been in company but a few days before. Parker, although sadly
reduced, and so feeble that he could not raise his head from his bosom,
was not so far gone as the other two. He suffered with great patience,
making no complaint, and endeavouring to inspire us with hope in every
manner he could devise. For myself, although at the commencement of
the voyage I had been in bad health, and was at all times of a delicate
constitution, I suffered less than any of us, being much less reduced in
frame, and retaining my powers of mind in a surprising degree, while the
rest were completely prostrated in intellect, and seemed to be
brought to a species of second childhood, generally simpering in
their expressions, with idiotic smiles, and uttering the most absurd
platitudes. At intervals, however, they would appear to revive suddenly,
as if inspired all at once with a consciousness of their condition, when
they would spring upon their feet in a momentary flash of vigour, and
speak, for a short period, of their prospects, in a manner altogether
rational, although full of the most intense despair. It is possible,
however, that my companions may have entertained the same opinion of
their own condition as I did of mine, and that I may have
unwittingly been guilty of the same extravagances and imbecilities as
themselves--this is a matter which cannot be determined.

About noon Parker declared that he saw land off the larboard quarter,
and it was with the utmost difficulty I could restrain him from plunging
into the sea with the view of swimming toward it. Peters and Augustus
took little notice of what he said, being apparently wrapped up in moody
contemplation. Upon looking in the direction pointed out, I could not
perceive the faintest appearance of the shore--indeed, I was too well
aware that we were far from any land to indulge in a hope of that
nature. It was a long time, nevertheless, before I could convince Parker
of his mistake. He then burst into a flood of tears, weeping like a
child, with loud cries and sobs, for two or three hours, when becoming
exhausted, he fell asleep.

Peters and Augustus now made several ineffectual efforts to swallow
portions of the leather. I advised them to chew it and spit it out; but
they were too excessively debilitated to be able to follow my advice. I
continued to chew pieces of it at intervals, and found some relief from
so doing; my chief distress was for water, and I was only prevented from
taking a draught from the sea by remembering the horrible consequences
which thus have resulted to others who were similarly situated with
ourselves.

The day wore on in this manner, when I suddenly discovered a sail to the
eastward, and on our larboard bow. She appeared to be a large ship, and
was coming nearly athwart us, being probably twelve or fifteen miles
distant. None of my companions had as yet discovered her, and I forbore
to tell them of her for the present, lest we might again be disappointed
of relief. At length upon her getting nearer, I saw distinctly that she
was heading immediately for us, with her light sails filled. I could now
contain myself no longer, and pointed her out to my fellow-sufferers.
They immediately sprang to their feet, again indulging in the most
extravagant demonstrations of joy, weeping, laughing in an idiotic
manner, jumping, stamping upon the deck, tearing their hair, and praying
and cursing by turns. I was so affected by their conduct, as well as
by what I considered a sure prospect of deliverance, that I could not
refrain from joining in with their madness, and gave way to the impulses
of my gratitude and ecstasy by lying and rolling on the deck, clapping
my hands, shouting, and other similar acts, until I was suddenly called
to my recollection, and once more to the extreme human misery and
despair, by perceiving the ship all at once with her stern fully
presented toward us, and steering in a direction nearly opposite to that
in which I had at first perceived her.

It was some time before I could induce my poor companions to believe
that this sad reverse in our prospects had actually taken place. They
replied to all my assertions with a stare and a gesture implying that
they were not to be deceived by such misrepresentations. The conduct of
Augustus most sensibly affected me. In spite of all I could say or do to
the contrary, he persisted in saying that the ship was rapidly nearing
us, and in making preparations to go on board of her. Some seaweed
floating by the brig, he maintained that it was the ship's boat, and
endeavoured to throw himself upon it, howling and shrieking in the most
heartrending manner, when I forcibly restrained him from thus casting
himself into the sea.

Having become in some degree pacified, we continued to watch the ship
until we finally lost sight of her, the weather becoming hazy, with
a light breeze springing up. As soon as she was entirely gone, Parker
turned suddenly toward me with an expression of countenance which made
me shudder. There was about him an air of self-possession which I had
not noticed in him until now, and before he opened his lips my heart
told me what he would say. He proposed, in a few words, that one of us
should die to preserve the existence of the others.




