What constitutes the essence, the nare, the principle of diddling is, in
fact, peculiar to the class of creatures that wear coats and pantaloons.
A crow thieves; a fox cheats; a weasel outwits; a man diddles. To diddle
is his destiny. "Man was made to mourn," says the poet. But not so:--he
was made to diddle. This is his aim--his object--his end. And for this
reason when a man's diddled we say he's "done."

Diddling, rightly considered, is a compound, of which the ingredients
are minuteness, interest, perseverance, ingenuity, audacity,
nonchalance, originality, impertinence, and grin.

Minuteness:--Your diddler is minute. His operations are upon a small
scale. His business is retail, for cash, or approved paper at sight.
Should he ever be tempted into magnificent speculation, he then,
at once, loses his distinctive features, and becomes what we term
"financier." This latter word conveys the diddling idea in every respect
except that of magnitude. A diddler may thus be regarded as a banker in
petto--a "financial operation," as a diddle at Brobdignag. The one is to
the other, as Homer to "Flaccus"--as a Mastodon to a mouse--as the tail
of a comet to that of a pig.

Interest:--Your diddler is guided by self-interest. He scorns to
diddle for the mere sake of the diddle. He has an object in view--his
pocket--and yours. He regards always the main chance. He looks to Number
One. You are Number Two, and must look to yourself.

Perseverance:--Your diddler perseveres. He is not readily discouraged.
Should even the banks break, he cares nothing about it. He steadily
pursues his end, and 'Ut canis a corio nunquam absterrebitur uncto,'
so he never lets go of his game.

Ingenuity:--Your diddler is ingenious. He has constructiveness large. He
understands plot. He invents and circumvents. Were he not Alexander he
would be Diogenes. Were he not a diddler, he would be a maker of patent
rat-traps or an angler for trout.

Audacity:--Your diddler is audacious.--He is a bold man. He carries
the war into Africa. He conquers all by assault. He would not fear the
daggers of Frey Herren. With a little more prudence Dick Turpin would
have made a good diddler; with a trifle less blarney, Daniel O'Connell;
with a pound or two more brains Charles the Twelfth.

Nonchalance:--Your diddler is nonchalant. He is not at all nervous. He
never had any nerves. He is never seduced into a flurry. He is never
put out--unless put out of doors. He is cool--cool as a cucumber. He
is calm--"calm as a smile from Lady Bury." He is easy--easy as an old
glove, or the damsels of ancient Baiae.

Originality:--Your diddler is original--conscientiously so. His thoughts
are his own. He would scorn to employ those of another. A stale trick is
his aversion. He would return a purse, I am sure, upon discovering that
he had obtained it by an unoriginal diddle.

Impertinence.--Your diddler is impertinent. He swaggers. He sets his
arms a-kimbo. He thrusts his hands in his trowsers' pockets. He sneers
in your face. He treads on your corns. He eats your dinner, he drinks
your wine, he borrows your money, he pulls your nose, he kicks your
poodle, and he kisses your wife.

Grin:--Your true diddler winds up all with a grin. But this nobody sees
but himself. He grins when his daily work is done--when his allotted
labors are accomplished--at night in his own closet, and altogether
for his own private entertainment. He goes home. He locks his door. He
divests himself of his clothes. He puts out his candle. He gets into
bed. He places his head upon the pillow. All this done, and your diddler
grins. This is no hypothesis. It is a matter of course. I reason a
priori, and a diddle would be no diddle without a grin.

The origin of the diddle is referrable to the infancy of the Human Race.
Perhaps the first diddler was Adam. At all events, we can trace the
science back to a very remote period of antiquity. The moderns, however,
have brought it to a perfection never dreamed of by our thick-headed
progenitors. Without pausing to speak of the "old saws," therefore,
I shall content myself with a compendious account of some of the more
"modern instances."


