On the second of July the mate came below drunk as usual, and in an
excessively good-humor. He came to Augustus's berth, and, giving him a
slap on the back, asked him if he thought he could behave himself if
he let him loose, and whether he would promise not to be going into the
cabin again. To this, of course, my friend answered in the affirmative,
when the ruffian set him at liberty, after making him drink from a flask
of rum which he drew from his coat-pocket. Both now went on deck, and I
did not see Augustus for about three hours. He then came below with the
good news that he had obtained permission to go about the brig as he
pleased anywhere forward of the mainmast, and that he had been ordered
to sleep, as usual, in the forecastle. He brought me, too, a good
dinner, and a plentiful supply of water. The brig was still cruising for
the vessel from the Cape Verds, and a sail was now in sight, which was
thought to be the one in question. As the events of the ensuing eight
days were of little importance, and had no direct bearing upon the main
incidents of my narrative, I will here throw them into the form of a
journal, as I do not wish to omit them altogether.

July 3. Augustus furnished me with three blankets, with which I
contrived a comfortable bed in my hiding-place. No one came below,
except my companion, during the day. Tiger took his station in the
berth just by the aperture, and slept heavily, as if not yet entirely
recovered from the effects of his sickness. Toward night a flaw of wind
struck the brig before sail could be taken in, and very nearly capsized
her. The puff died away immediately, however, and no damage was done
beyond the splitting of the foretopsail. Dirk Peters treated Augustus
all this day with great kindness and entered into a long conversation
with him respecting the Pacific Ocean, and the islands he had visited
in that region. He asked him whether he would not like to go with the
mutineers on a kind of exploring and pleasure voyage in those quarters,
and said that the men were gradually coming over to the mate's views.
To this Augustus thought it best to reply that he would be glad to go
on such an adventure, since nothing better could be done, and that any
thing was preferable to a piratical life.

July 4th. The vessel in sight proved to be a small brig from Liverpool,
and was allowed to pass unmolested. Augustus spent most of his time
on deck, with a view of obtaining all the information in his power
respecting the intentions of the mutineers. They had frequent and
violent quarrels among themselves, in one of which a harpooner, Jim
Bonner, was thrown overboard. The party of the mate was gaining ground.
Jim Bonner belonged to the cook's gang, of which Peters was a partisan.

July 5th. About daybreak there came on a stiff breeze from the west,
which at noon freshened into a gale, so that the brig could carry
nothing more than her trysail and foresail. In taking in the
foretopsail, Simms, one of the common hands, and belonging also to
the cook's gang, fell overboard, being very much in liquor, and was
drowned--no attempt being made to save him. The whole number of persons
on board was now thirteen, to wit: Dirk Peters; Seymour, the black
cook; Jones, Greely, Hartman Rogers and William Allen, all of the
cook's party; of the cook's party; the mate, whose name I never
learned; Absalom Hicks, Wilson, John Hunty Richard Parker, of the mate's
party;--besides Augustus and myself.

July 6th. The gale lasted all this day, blowing in heavy squalls,
accompanied with rain. The brig took in a good deal of water through her
seams, and one of the pumps was kept continually going, Augustus being
forced to take his turn. Just at twilight a large ship passed close
by us, without having been discovered until within hail. The ship was
supposed to be the one for which the mutineers were on the lookout. The
mate hailed her, but the reply was drowned in the roaring of the gale.
At eleven, a sea was shipped amidships, which tore away a great portion
of the larboard bulwarks, and did some other slight damage. Toward
morning the weather moderated, and at sunrise there was very little
wind.

July 7th. There was a heavy swell running all this day, during which the
brig, being light, rolled excessively, and many articles broke loose in
the hold, as I could hear distinctly from my hiding-place. I suffered
a great deal from sea-sickness. Peters had a long conversation this day
with Augustus, and told him that two of his gang, Greely and Allen, had
gone over to the mate, and were resolved to turn pirates. He put several
questions to Augustus which he did not then exactly understand. During
a part of this evening the leak gained upon the vessel; and little could
be done to remedy it, as it was occasioned by the brigs straining, and
taking in the water through her seams. A sail was thrummed, and got
under the bows, which aided us in some measure, so that we began to gain
upon the leak.

July 8th. A light breeze sprang up at sunrise from the eastward, when
the mate headed the brig to the southwest, with the intention of making
some of the West India islands in pursuance of his piratical designs. No
opposition was made by Peters or the cook--at least none in the hearing
of Augustus. All idea of taking the vessel from the Cape Verds was
abandoned. The leak was now easily kept under by one pump going every
three quarters of an hour. The sail was drawn from beneath the bows.
Spoke two small schooners during the day.

July 9th. Fine weather. All hands employed in repairing bulwarks. Peters
had again a long conversation with Augustus, and spoke more plainly than
he had done heretofore. He said nothing should induce him to come into
the mate's views, and even hinted his intention of taking the brig out
of his hands. He asked my friend if he could depend upon his aid in such
case, to which Augustus said, "Yes," without hesitation. Peters then
said he would sound the others of his party upon the subject, and went
away. During the remainder of the day Augustus had no opportunity of
speaking with him privately.


