On Monday, it was ascertained that the girl had not been to the Rue des
Drômes; and when the day elapsed without tidings of her, a tardy search
was instituted at several points in the city, and its environs. It was
not, however until the fourth day from the period of disappearance that
any thing satisfactory was ascertained respecting her. On this day,
(Wednesday, the twenty-fifth of June,) a Monsieur Beauvais, (*8) who,
with a friend, had been making inquiries for Marie near the Barrière
du Roule, on the shore of the Seine which is opposite the Rue Pavée St.
Andrée, was informed that a corpse had just been towed ashore by some
fishermen, who had found it floating in the river. Upon seeing the
body, Beauvais, after some hesitation, identified it as that of the
perfumery-girl. His friend recognized it more promptly.

The face was suffused with dark blood, some of which issued from the
mouth. No foam was seen, as in the case of the merely drowned. There was
no discoloration in the cellular tissue. About the throat were bruises
and impressions of fingers. The arms were bent over on the chest and
were rigid. The right hand was clenched; the left partially open. On
the left wrist were two circular excoriations, apparently the effect
of ropes, or of a rope in more than one volution. A part of the right
wrist, also, was much chafed, as well as the back throughout its extent,
but more especially at the shoulder-blades. In bringing the body to
the shore the fishermen had attached to it a rope; but none of the
excoriations had been effected by this. The flesh of the neck was much
swollen. There were no cuts apparent, or bruises which appeared the
effect of blows. A piece of lace was found tied so tightly around the
neck as to be hidden from sight; it was completely buried in the flesh,
and was fasted by a knot which lay just under the left ear. This alone
would have sufficed to produce death. The medical testimony spoke
confidently of the virtuous character of the deceased. She had been
subjected, it said, to brutal violence. The corpse was in such condition
when found, that there could have been no difficulty in its recognition
by friends.

The dress was much torn and otherwise disordered. In the outer garment,
a slip, about a foot wide, had been torn upward from the bottom hem to
the waist, but not torn off. It was wound three times around the waist,
and secured by a sort of hitch in the back. The dress immediately
beneath the frock was of fine muslin; and from this a slip eighteen
inches wide had been torn entirely out--torn very evenly and with great
care. It was found around her neck, fitting loosely, and secured with a
hard knot. Over this muslin slip and the slip of lace, the strings of a
bonnet were attached; the bonnet being appended. The knot by which the
strings of the bonnet were fastened, was not a lady's, but a slip or
sailor's knot.

After the recognition of the corpse, it was not, as usual, taken to the
Morgue, (this formality being superfluous,) but hastily interred not far
front the spot at which it was brought ashore. Through the exertions of
Beauvais, the matter was industriously hushed up, as far as possible;
and several days had elapsed before any public emotion resulted. A
weekly paper, (*9) however, at length took up the theme; the corpse was
disinterred, and a re-examination instituted; but nothing was elicited
beyond what has been already noted. The clothes, however, were
now submitted to the mother and friends of the deceased, and fully
identified as those worn by the girl upon leaving home.

Meantime, the excitement increased hourly. Several individuals were
arrested and discharged. St. Eustache fell especially under suspicion;
and he failed, at first, to give an intelligible account of his
whereabouts during the Sunday on which Marie left home. Subsequently,
however, he submitted to Monsieur G----, affidavits, accounting
satisfactorily for every hour of the day in question. As time passed and
no discovery ensued, a thousand contradictory rumors were circulated,
and journalists busied themselves in suggestions. Among these, the one
which attracted the most notice, was the idea that Marie Rogêt still
lived--that the corpse found in the Seine was that of some other
unfortunate. It will be proper that I submit to the reader some passages
which embody the suggestion alluded to. These passages are literal
translations from L'Etoile, (*10) a paper conducted, in general, with
much ability.

"Mademoiselle Rogêt left her mother's house on Sunday morning, June the
twenty-second, 18--, with the ostensible purpose of going to see her
aunt, or some other connexion, in the Rue des Drômes. From that hour,
nobody is proved to have seen her. There is no trace or tidings of her
at all.... There has no person, whatever, come forward, so far, who
saw her at all, on that day, after she left her mother's door.... Now,
though we have no evidence that Marie Rogêt was in the land of the
living after nine o'clock on Sunday, June the twenty-second, we have
proof that, up to that hour, she was alive. On Wednesday noon, at
twelve, a female body was discovered afloat on the shore of the Barrière
de Roule. This was, even if we presume that Marie Rogêt was thrown into
the river within three hours after she left her mother's house, only
three days from the time she left her home--three days to an hour. But
it is folly to suppose that the murder, if murder was committed on
her body, could have been consummated soon enough to have enabled her
murderers to throw the body into the river before midnight. Those who
are guilty of such horrid crimes, choose darkness rather the light....
Thus we see that if the body found in the river was that of Marie Rogêt,
it could only have been in the water two and a half days, or three at
the outside. All experience has shown that drowned bodies, or bodies
thrown into the water immediately after death by violence, require from
six to ten days for decomposition to take place to bring them to the top
of the water. Even where a cannon is fired over a corpse, and it rises
before at least five or six days' immersion, it sinks again, if let
alone. Now, we ask, what was there in this cave to cause a departure
from the ordinary course of nature?... If the body had been kept in its
mangled state on shore until Tuesday night, some trace would be found on
shore of the murderers. It is a doubtful point, also, whether the body
would be so soon afloat, even were it thrown in after having been
dead two days. And, furthermore, it is exceedingly improbable that any
villains who had committed such a murder as is here supposed, would
have throw the body in without weight to sink it, when such a precaution
could have so easily been taken."

The editor here proceeds to argue that the body must have been in the
water "not three days merely, but, at least, five times three days,"
because it was so far decomposed that Beauvais had great difficulty
in recognizing it. This latter point, however, was fully disproved. I
continue the translation:

