Picture to yourself a stern, muscular figure, in fanciful bandit
costume, with pistols and poniards in belt, his brawny neck bare, a
handkerchief loosely thrown around it, and the two ends in front strung
with rings of all kinds, the spoils of travellers; reliques and medals
hung on his breast; his hat decorated with various-colored ribbands;
his vest and short breeches of bright colors and finely embroidered;
his legs in buskins or leggins. Fancy him on a mountain height, among
wild rocks and rugged oaks, leaning on his carbine as if meditating
some exploit, while far below are beheld villages and villas, the
scenes of his maraudings, with the wide Campagna dimly extending in the
distance.

The robber was pleased with the sketch, and seemed to admire himself
upon paper. I had scarcely finished, when the laborer arrived who had
been sent for my ransom. He had reached Tusculum two hours after
midnight. He brought me a letter from the prince, who was in bed at the
time of his arrival. As I had predicted, he treated the demand as
extravagant, but offered five hundred dollars for my ransom. Having no
money by him at the moment, he had sent a note for the amount, payable
to whomever should conduct me safe and sound to Rome. I presented the
note of hand to the chieftain; he received it with a shrug. "Of what
use are notes of hand to us?" said he, "who can we send with you to
Rome to receive it? We are all marked men, known and described at every
gate and military post, and village church-door. No, we must have gold
and silver; let the sum be paid in cash and you shall be restored to
liberty."

The captain again placed a sheet of paper before me to communicate His
determination to the prince. When I had finished the letter and took
the sheet from the quire, I found on the opposite side of it the
portrait which I had just been tracing. I was about to tear it off and
give it to the chief.

"Hold," said he, "let it go to Rome; let them see what kind of looking
fellow I am. Perhaps the prince and his friends may form as good an
opinion of me from my face as you have done."

This was said sportively, yet it was evident there was vanity lurking
at the bottom. Even this wary, distrustful chief of banditti forgot for
a moment his usual foresight and precaution in the common wish to be
admired. He never reflected what use might be made of this portrait in
his pursuit and conviction.

The letter was folded and directed, and the messenger departed again
For Tusculum. It was now eleven o'clock in the morning, and as yet we
had eaten nothing. In spite of all my anxiety, I began to feel a
craving appetite. I was glad, therefore, to hear the captain talk
something of eating. He observed that for three days and nights they
had been lurking about among rocks and woods, meditating their
expedition to Tusculum, during which all their provisions had been
exhausted. He should now take measures to procure a supply. Leaving me,
therefore, in the charge of his comrade, in whom he appeared to have
implicit confidence, he departed, assuring me, that in less than two
hours we should make a good dinner. Where it was to come from was an
enigma to me, though it was evident these beings had their secret
friends and agents throughout the country.

Indeed, the inhabitants of these mountains and of the valleys which
they embosom are a rude, half civilized set. The towns and villages
among the forests of the Abruzzi, shut up from the rest of the world,
are almost like savage dens. It is wonderful that such rude abodes, so
little known and visited, should be embosomed in the midst of one of
the most travelled and civilized countries of Europe. Among these
regions the robber prowls unmolested; not a mountaineer hesitates to
give him secret harbor and assistance. The shepherds, however, who tend
their flocks among the mountains, are the favorite emissaries of the
robbers, when they would send messages down to the valleys either for
ransom or supplies. The shepherds of the Abruzzi are as wild as the
scenes they frequent. They are clad in a rude garb of black or brown
sheep-skin; they have high conical hats, and coarse sandals of cloth
bound round their legs with thongs, similar to those worn by the
robbers. They carry long staffs, on which as they lean they form
picturesque objects in the lonely landscape, and they are followed by
their ever-constant companion, the dog. They are a curious, questioning
set, glad at any time to relieve the monotony of their solitude by the
conversation of the passerby, and the dog will lend an attentive ear,
and put on as sagacious and inquisitive a look as his master.

But I am wandering from my story. I was now left alone with one of the
robbers, the confidential companion of the chief. He was the youngest
and most vigorous of the band, and though his countenance had something
of that dissolute fierceness which seems natural to this desperate,
lawless mode of life, yet there were traits of manly beauty about it.
As an artist I could not but admire it. I had remarked in him an air of
abstraction and reverie, and at times a movement of inward suffering
and impatience. He now sat on the ground; his elbows on his knees, his
head resting between his clenched fists, and his eyes fixed on the
earth with an expression of sad and bitter rumination. I had grown
familiar with him from repeated conversations, and had found him
superior in mind to the rest of the band. I was anxious to seize every
opportunity of sounding the feelings of these singular beings. I
fancied I read in the countenance of this one traces of
self-condemnation and remorse; and the ease with which I had drawn
forth the confidence of the chieftain encouraged me to hope the same
with his followers.

After a little preliminary conversation, I ventured to ask him if he
did not feel regret at having abandoned his family and taken to this
dangerous profession. "I feel," replied he, "but one regret, and that
will end only with my life;" as he said this he pressed his clenched
fists upon his bosom, drew his breath through his set teeth, and added
with deep emotion, "I have something within here that stifles me; it is
like a burning iron consuming my very heart. I could tell you a
miserable story, but not now--another time."--He relapsed into his
former position, and sat with his head between his hands, muttering to
himself in broken ejaculations, and what appeared at times to be curses
and maledictions. I saw he was not in a mood to be disturbed, so I left
him to himself. In a little time the exhaustion of his feelings, and
probably the fatigues he had undergone in this expedition, began to
produce drowsiness. He struggled with it for a time, but the warmth and
sultriness of mid-day made it irresistible, and he at length stretched
himself upon the herbage and fell asleep.


