It was, he said, during his residence at Smallholm crags that he first
imbibed his passion for legendary tales, border traditions, and old
national songs and ballads. His grandmother and aunts were well versed
in that kind of lore, so current in Scottish country life. They used to
recount them in long, gloomy winter days, and about the ingle nook at
night, in conclave with their gossip visitors; and little Walter would
sit and listen with greedy ear; thus taking into his infant mind the
seeds of many a splendid fiction.

There was an old shepherd, he said, in the service of the family, who
used to sit under the sunny wall, and tell marvellous stories, and
recite old time ballads, as he knitted stockings. Scott used to be
wheeled out in his chair, in fine weather, and would sit beside the old
man, and listen to him for hours.

The situation of Sandy Knowe was favorable both for storyteller and
listener. It commanded a wide view over all the border country, with
its feudal towers, its haunted glens, and wizard streams. As the old
shepherd told his tales, he could point out the very scene of action.
Thus, before Scott could walk, he was made familiar with the scenes of
his future stories; they were all seen as through a magic medium, and
took that tinge of romance, which they ever after retained in his
imagination. From the height of Sandy Knowe, he may be said to have had
the first look-out upon the promised land of his future glory.

On referring to Scott's works, I find many of the circumstances related
in this conversation, about the old tower, and the boyish scenes
connected with it, recorded in the introduction to Marmion, already
cited. This was frequently the case with Scott; incidents and feelings
that had appeared in his writings, were apt to be mingled up in his
conversation, for they had been taken from what he had witnessed and
felt in real life, and were connected with those scenes among which he
lived, and moved, and had his being. I make no scruple at quoting the
passage relative to the tower, though it repeats much of the foregone
imagery, and with vastly superior effect:

  Thus, while I ape the measure wild
  Of tales that charmed me yet a child,
  Rude though they be, still with the chime
  Return the thoughts of early time;
  And feelings roused in life's first day,
  Glow in the line, and prompt the lay.
  Then rise those crags, that mountain tower.
  Which charmed my fancy's wakening hour,
  Though no broad river swept along
  To claim perchance heroic song;
  Though sighed no groves in summer gale
  To prompt of love a softer tale;
  Though scarce a puny streamlet's speed
  Claimed homage from a shepherd's reed;
  Yet was poetic impulse given,
  By the green hill and clear blue heaven.
  It was a barren scene, and wild,
  Where naked cliffs were rudely piled;
  But ever and anon between
  Lay velvet tufts of loveliest green;
  And well the lonely infant knew
  Recesses where the wall-flower grew,
  And honey-suckle loved to crawl
  Up the low crag and ruined wall.
  I deemed such nooks the sweetest shade
  The sun in all his round surveyed;
  And still I thought that shattered tower
  The mightiest work of human power;
  And marvell'd as the aged hind
  With some strange tale bewitched my mind,
  Of forayers, who, with headlong force,
  Down from that strength had spurred their horse,
  Their southern rapine to renew,
  Far in the distant Cheviot's blue,
  And, home returning, filled the hall
  With revel, wassail-rout, and brawl--
  Methought that still, with tramp and clang
  The gate-way's broken arches rang;
  Methought grim features, seamed with scars,
  Glared through the window's rusty bars.
  And ever by the winter hearth,
  Old tales I heard of woe or mirth,
  Of lovers' slights, of ladies' charms,
  Of witches' spells, of warriors' arms;
  Of patriot battles, won of old,
  By Wallace wight and Bruce the bold;
  Of later fields of feud and fight,
  When pouring from the Highland height,
  The Scottish clans, in headlong sway,
  Had swept the scarlet ranks away.
  While stretched at length upon the floor,
  Again I fought each combat o'er.
  Pebbles and shells, in order laid,
  The mimic ranks of war displayed;
  And onward still the Scottish Lion bore,
  And still the scattered Southron fled before."

Scott eyed the distant height of Sandy Knowe with an earnest gaze as we
rode along, and said he had often thought of buying the place,
repairing the old tower, and making it his residence. He has in some
measure, however, paid off his early debt of gratitude, in clothing it
with poetic and romantic associations, by his tale of "The Eve of St.
John." It is to be hoped that those who actually possess so interesting
a monument of Scott's early days, will preserve it from further
dilapidation.


