"Our grimalkin here," added Scott, "sometimes reminds me of the story,
by the airs of sovereignty which he assumes; and I am apt to treat him
with respect from the idea that he may be a great prince incog., and
may some time or other come to the throne."

In this way Scott would make the habits and peculiarities of even the
dumb animals about him subjects for humorous remark or whimsical story.

Our evening was enlivened also by an occasional song from Sophia Scott,
at the request of her father. She never wanted to be asked twice, but
complied frankly and cheerfully. Her songs were all Scotch, sung
without any accompaniment, in a simple manner, but with great spirit
and expression, and in their native dialects, which gave them an
additional charm. It was delightful to hear her carol off in sprightly
style, and with an animated air, some of those generous-spirited old
Jacobite songs, once current among the adherents of the Pretender in
Scotland, in which he is designated by the appellation of "The Young
Chevalier."

These songs were much relished by Scott, notwithstanding his loyalty;
for the unfortunate "Chevalier" has always been a hero of romance with
him, as he has with many other staunch adherents to the House of
Hanover, now that the Stuart line has lost all its terrors. In speaking
on the subject, Scott mentioned as a curious fact, that, among the
papers of the "Chevalier," which had been submitted by government to
his inspection, he had found a memorial to Charles from some adherents
in America, dated 1778, proposing to set up his standard in the back
settlements. I regret that, at the time, I did not make more particular
inquiries of Scott on the subject; the document in question, however,
in all probability, still exists among the Pretender's papers, which
are in the possession of the British Government. In the course of the
evening, Scott related the story of a whimsical picture hanging in the
room, which had been drawn for him by a lady of his acquaintance. It
represented the doleful perplexity of a wealthy and handsome young
English knight of the olden time, who, in the course of a border foray,
had been captured and carried off to the castle of a hard-headed and
high-handed old baron. The unfortunate youth was thrown into a dungeon,
and a tall gallows erected before the castle gate for his execution.
When all was ready, he was brought into the castle hall where the grim
baron was seated in state, with his warriors armed to the teeth around
him, and was given his choice, either to swing on the gibbet or to
marry the baron's daughter. The last may be thought an easy
alternative, but unfortunately, the baron's young lady was hideously
ugly, with a mouth from ear to ear, so that not a suitor was to be had
for her, either for love or money, and she was known throughout the
border country by the name of Muckle-mouthed Mag!

The picture in question represented the unhappy dilemma of the handsome
youth. Before him sat the grim baron, with a face worthy of the father
of such a daughter, and looking daggers and ratsbane. On one side of
him was Muckle-mouthed Mag, with an amorous smile across the whole
breadth of her countenance, and a leer enough to turn a man to stone;
on the other side was the father confessor, a sleek friar, jogging the
youth's elbow, and pointing to the gallows, seen in perspective through
the open portal.

The story goes, that after long laboring in mind, between the altar and
the halter, the love of life prevailed, and the youth resigned himself
to the charms of Muckle-mouthed Mag. Contrary to all the probabilities
of romance, the match proved a happy one. The baron's daughter, if not
beautiful, was a most exemplary wife; her husband was never troubled
with any of those doubts and jealousies which sometimes mar the
happiness of connubial life, and was made the father of a fair and
undoubtedly legitimate hue, which still flourishes on the border.

I give but a faint outline of the story from vague recollection; it
may, perchance, be more richly related elsewhere, by some one who may
retain something of the delightful humor with which Scott recounted it.

When I retired for the night, I found it almost impossible to sleep;
the idea of being under the roof of Scott; of being on the borders of
the Tweed, in the very centre of that region which had for some time
past been the favorite scene of romantic fiction; and above all, the
recollections of the ramble I had taken, the company in which I had
taken it, and the conversation which had passed, all fermented in my
mind, and nearly drove sleep from my pillow.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the following morning, the sun darted his beams from over the hills
through the low lattice window. I rose at an early hour, and looked out
between the branches of eglantine which overhung the casement. To my
surprise Scott was already up and forth, seated on a fragment of stone,
and chatting with the workmen employed on the new building. I had
supposed, after the time he had wasted upon me yesterday, he would be
closely occupied this morning, but he appeared like a man of leisure,
who had nothing to do but bask in the sunshine and amuse himself.

I soon dressed myself and joined him. He talked about his proposed
plans of Abbotsford; happy would it have been for him could he have
contented himself with his delightful little vine-covered cottage, and
the simple, yet hearty and hospitable style, in which he lived at the
time of my visit. The great pile of Abbotsford, with the huge expense
it entailed upon him, of servants, retainers, guests, and baronial
style, was a drain upon his purse, a tax upon his exertions, and a
weight upon his mind, that finally crushed him.

As yet, however, all was in embryo and perspective, and Scott pleased
himself with picturing out his future residence, as he would one of the
fanciful creations of his own romances. "It was one of his air
castles," he said, "which he was reducing to solid stone and mortar."
About the place were strewed various morsels from the ruins of Melrose
Abbey, which were to be incorporated in his mansion. He had already
constructed out of similar materials a kind of Gothic shrine over a
spring, and had surmounted it by a small stone cross.

Among the relics from the Abbey which lay scattered before us, was a
most quaint and antique little lion, either of red stone, or painted
red, which hit my fancy. I forgot whose cognizance it was; but I shall
never forget the delightful observations concerning old Melrose to
which it accidentally gave rise. The Abbey was evidently a pile that
called up all Scott's poetic and romantic feelings; and one to which he
was enthusiastically attached by the most fanciful and delightful of
his early associations. He spoke of it, I may say, with affection.
"There is no telling," said he, "what treasures are hid in that
glorious old pile. It is a famous place for antiquarian plunder; there
are such rich bits of old time sculpture for the architect, and old
time story for the poet. There is as rare picking in it as a Stilton
cheese, and in the same taste--the mouldier the better."

He went on to mention circumstances of "mighty import" connected with
the Abbey, which had never been touched, and which had even escaped the
researches of Johnny Bower. The heart of Robert Bruce, the hero of
Scotland, had been buried in it. He dwelt on the beautiful story of
Bruce's pious and chivalrous request in his dying hour, that his heart
might be carried to the Holy Land and placed in the Holy Sepulchre, in
fulfilment of a vow of pilgrimage; and of the loyal expedition of Sir
James Douglas to convey the glorious relic. Much might be made, he
said, out of the adventures of Sir James in that adventurous age; of
his fortunes in Spain, and his death in a crusade against the Moors;
with the subsequent fortunes of the heart of Robert Bruce, until it was
brought back to its native land, and enshrined within the holy walls of
old Melrose.


