Ronda was the most virulent nest of Moorish depredators in the whole
border country. It was situated in the midst of the wild Serrania, or
chain of mountains of the same name, which are uncommonly lofty, broken,
and precipitous. It stood on an almost isolated rock, nearly encircled
by a deep valley, or rather chasm, through which ran the beautiful river
called Rio Verde. The Moors of this city were the most active, robust,
and warlike of all the mountaineers, and their very children discharged
the crossbow with unerring aim. They were incessantly harassing the rich
plains of Andalusia; their city abounded with Christian captives, who
might sigh in vain for deliverance from this impregnable fortress. Such
was Ronda in the time of the Moors, and it has ever retained something
of the same character, even to the present day. Its inhabitants
continue to be among the boldest, fiercest, and most adventurous of the
Andalusian mountaineers, and the Serrania de Ronda is famous as the most
dangerous resort of the bandit and the contrabandista.

Hamet Zeli, surnamed El Zegri, was the commander of this belligerent
city and its fierce inhabitants. He was of the tribe of the Zegries,
and one of the most proud and daring of that warlike race. Besides
the inhabitants of Ronda and some of his own tribe, he had a legion of
African Moors in his immediate service. They were of the tribe of the
Gomeres, so called from their native mountains--mercenary troops whose
hot African blood had not yet been tempered by the softer living of
Spain, and whose whole business was to fight. These he kept always well
armed and well appointed. The rich pasturage of the valley of Ronda
produced a breed of horses famous for strength and speed; no cavalry,
therefore, was better mounted than the band of Gomeres. Rapid on the
march, fierce in the attack, it would sweep down upon the Andalusian
plains like a sudden blast from the mountains, and pass away as suddenly
before there was time for pursuit.

There was nothing that stirred up the spirit of the Moors of the
frontiers more thoroughly than the idea of a foray. The summons of Bexir
was gladly obeyed by the alcaydes of the border towns, and in a little
while there was a force of fifteen hundred horse and four thousand foot,
the very pith and marrow of the surrounding country, assembled within
the walls of Ronda. The people of the place anticipated with eagerness
the rich spoils of Andalusia soon to crowd their gates; throughout the
day the city resounded with the noise of kettle-drum and trumpet; the
high-mettled steeds stamped and neighed in their stalls as if they
shared the impatience for the foray; while the Christian captives sighed
as the varied din of preparation reached their rocky dungeons, denoting
a fresh expedition against their countrymen.

The infidel host sallied forth full of spirits, anticipating an easy
ravage and abundant booty. They encouraged each other in a contempt for
the prowess of the foe. Many of the warriors of Malaga and of some of
the mountain-towns had insultingly arrayed themselves in the splendid
armor of the Christian knights slain or taken prisoners in the famous
massacre, and some of them rode the Andalusian steeds captured on that
occasion.

The wary Bexir concerted his plans so secretly and expeditiously that
the Christian towns of Andalusia had not the least suspicion of the
storm gathering beyond the mountains. The vast rocky range of the
Serrania de Ronda extended like a screen, covering all their movements
from observation.

The army made its way as rapidly as the rugged nature of the mountains
would permit, guided by Hamet el Zegri, the bold alcayde of Ronda, who
knew every pass and defile: not a drum nor the clash of a cymbal nor
the blast of a trumpet was permitted to be heard. The mass of war
rolled quietly on as the gathering cloud to the brow of the mountains,
intending to burst down like the thunderbolt upon the plain.

Never let the most wary commander fancy himself secure from discovery,
for rocks have eyes, and trees have ears, and the birds of the air have
tongues, to betray the most secret enterprise. There chanced at this
time to be six Christian scouts prowling about the savage heights of the
Serrania de Ronda. They were of that kind of lawless ruffians who infest
the borders of belligerent countries, ready at any time to fight for
pay or prowl for plunder. The wild mountain-passes of Spain have ever
abounded with loose rambling vagabonds of the kind--soldiers in war,
robbers in peace, guides, guards, smugglers, or cutthroats according to
the circumstances of the case.

These six marauders (says Fray Antonio Agapida) were on this occasion
chosen instruments, sanctified by the righteousness of their cause. They
were lurking among the mountains to entrap Moorish cattle or Moorish
prisoners, both of which were equally salable in the Christian market.
They had ascended one of the loftiest cliffs, and were looking out like
birds of prey, ready to pounce upon anything that might offer in
the valley, when they descried the Moorish army emerging from a
mountain-glen. They watched it as it wound below them, remarking the
standards of the various towns and the pennons of the commanders. They
hovered about it on its march, skulking from cliff to cliff, until they
saw the route by which it intended to enter the Christian country.
They then dispersed, each making his way by the secret passes of the
mountains to some different alcayde, that they might spread the alarm
far and wide, and each get a separate reward.

One hastened to Luis Fernandez Puerto Carrero, the same valiant alcayde
who had repulsed Muley Abul Hassan from the walls of Alhama, and who
now commanded at Ecija in the absence of the master of Santiago. Others
roused the town of Utrera and the places of that neighborhood, putting
them all on the alert.*



