Being about to give a few sketches taken during a three weeks' sojourn
in the ancestral mansion of the late Lord Byron, I think it proper to
premise some brief particulars concerning its history.

Newstead Abbey is one of the finest specimens in existence of those
quaint and romantic piles, half castle, half convent, which remain as
monuments of the olden times of England. It stands, too, in the midst
of a legendary neighborhood; being in the heart of Sherwood Forest, and
surrounded by the haunts of Robin Hood and his band of outlaws, so
famous in ancient ballad and nursery tale. It is true, the forest
scarcely exists but in name, and the tract of country over which it
once extended its broad solitudes and shades, is now an open and
smiling region, cultivated with parks and farms, and enlivened with
villages.

Newstead, which probably once exerted a monastic sway over this region,
and controlled the consciences of the rude foresters, was originally a
priory, founded in the latter part of the twelfth century, by Henry
II., at the time when he sought, by building of shrines and convents,
and by other acts of external piety, to expiate the murder of Thomas a
Becket. The priory was dedicated to God and the Virgin, and was
inhabited by a fraternity of canons regular of St. Augustine. This
order was originally simple and abstemious in its mode of living, and
exemplary in its conduct; but it would seem that it gradually lapsed
into those abuses which disgraced too many of the wealthy monastic
establishments; for there are documents among its archives which
intimate the prevalence of gross misrule and dissolute sensuality among
its members. At the time of the dissolution of the convents during the
reign of Henry VIII., Newstead underwent a sudden reverse, being given,
with the neighboring manor and rectory of Papelwick, to Sir John Byron,
Steward of Manchester and Rochdale, and Lieutenant of Sherwood Forest.
This ancient family worthy figures in the traditions of the Abbey, and
in the ghost stories with which it abounds, under the quaint and
graphic appellation of "Sir John Byron the Little, with the great
Beard." He converted the saintly edifice into a castellated dwelling,
making it his favorite residence and the seat of his forest
jurisdiction.

The Byron family being subsequently ennobled by a baronial title, and
enriched by various possessions, maintained great style and retinue at
Newstead. The proud edifice partook, however, of the vicissitudes of
the times, and Lord Byron, in one of his poems, represents it as
alternately the scene of lordly wassailing and of civil war:

  "Hark, how the hall resounding to the strain,
    Shakes with the martial music's novel din!
  The heralds of a warrior's haughty reign,
    High crested banners wave thy walls within.

  "Of changing sentinels the distant hum,
    The mirth of feasts, the clang of burnish'd arms,
  The braying trumpet, and the hoarser drum,
    Unite in concert with increased alarms."

About the middle of the last century, the Abbey came into the
possession of another noted character, who makes no less figure in its
shadowy traditions than Sir John the Little with the great Beard. This
was the grand-uncle of the poet, familiarly known among the gossiping
chroniclers of the Abbey as "the Wicked Lord Byron." He is represented
as a man of irritable passions and vindictive temper, in the indulgence
of which an incident occurred which gave a turn to his whole character
and life, and in some measure affected the fortunes of the Abbey. In
his neighborhood lived his kinsman and friend, Mr. Chaworth, proprietor
of Annesley Hall. Being together in London in 1765, in a chamber of the
Star and Garter tavern in Pall Mall, a quarrel rose between them. Byron
insisted upon settling it upon the spot by single combat. They fought
without seconds, by the dim light of a candle, and Mr. Chaworth,
although the most expert swordsman, received a mortal wound. With his
dying breath he related such particulars the contest as induced the
coroner's jury to return a verdict of wilful murder. Lord Byron was
sent to the Tower, and subsequently tried before the House of Peers,
where an ultimate verdict was given of manslaughter.

He retired after this to the Abbey, where he shut himself up to brood
over his disgraces; grew gloomy, morose, and fantastical, and indulged
in fits of passion and caprice, that made him the theme of rural wonder
and scandal. No tale was too wild or too monstrous for vulgar belief.
Like his successor the poet, he was accused of all kinds of vagaries
and wickedness. It was said that he always went armed, as if prepared
to commit murder on the least provocation. At one time, when a
gentleman of his neighborhood was to dine _tete a tete_ with him,
it is said a brace of pistols were gravely laid with the knives and
forks upon the table, as part of the regular table furniture, and
implements that might be needed in the course of the repast. Another
rumor states that being exasperated at his coachman for disobedience to
orders, he shot him on the spot, threw his body into the coach where
Lady Byron was seated, and, mounting the box, officiated in his stead.
At another time, according to the same vulgar rumors, he threw her
ladyship into the lake in front of the Abbey, where she would have been
drowned, but for the timely aid of the gardener. These stories are
doubtless exaggerations of trivial incidents which may have occurred;
but it is certain that the wayward passions of this unhappy man caused
a separation from his wife, and finally spread a solitude around him.
Being displeased at the marriage of his son and heir, he displayed an
inveterate malignity toward him. Not being able to cut off his
succession to the Abbey estate, which descended to him by entail, he
endeavored to injure it as much as possible, so that it might come a
mere wreck into his hands. For this purpose he suffered the Abbey to
fall out of repair, and everything to go to waste about it, and cut
down all the timber on the estate, laying low many a tract of old
Sherwood Forest, so that the Abbey lands lay stripped and bare of all
their ancient honors. He was baffled in his unnatural revenge by the
premature death of his son, and passed the remainder of his days in his
deserted and dilapidated halls, a gloomy misanthrope, brooding amidst
the scenes he had laid desolate.


