Saturday lives in my memory as a day of suspense.  It was a day of
lassitude too, hot and close, with, I am told, a rapidly fluctuating
barometer.  I had slept but little, though my wife had succeeded in
sleeping, and I rose early.  I went into my garden before breakfast
and stood listening, but towards the common there was nothing stirring
but a lark.

The milkman came as usual.  I heard the rattle of his chariot and I
went round to the side gate to ask the latest news.  He told me that
during the night the Martians had been surrounded by troops, and that
guns were expected.  Then--a familiar, reassuring note--I heard a train
running towards Woking.

"They aren't to be killed," said the milkman, "if that can possibly
be avoided."

I saw my neighbour gardening, chatted with him for a time, and then
strolled in to breakfast.  It was a most unexceptional morning.  My
neighbour was of opinion that the troops would be able to capture or
to destroy the Martians during the day.

"It's a pity they make themselves so unapproachable," he said.  "It
would be curious to know how they live on another planet; we might
learn a thing or two."

He came up to the fence and extended a handful of strawberries, for
his gardening was as generous as it was enthusiastic.  At the same
time he told me of the burning of the pine woods about the Byfleet
Golf Links.

"They say," said he, "that there's another of those blessed things
fallen there--number two.  But one's enough, surely.  This lot'll cost
the insurance people a pretty penny before everything's settled."  He
laughed with an air of the greatest good humour as he said this.  The
woods, he said, were still burning, and pointed out a haze of smoke to
me.  "They will be hot under foot for days, on account of the thick
soil of pine needles and turf," he said, and then grew serious over
"poor Ogilvy."

After breakfast, instead of working, I decided to walk down
towards the common.  Under the railway bridge I found a group of
soldiers--sappers, I think, men in small round caps, dirty red jackets
unbuttoned, and showing their blue shirts, dark trousers, and boots
coming to the calf.  They told me no one was allowed over the canal,
and, looking along the road towards the bridge, I saw one of the
Cardigan men standing sentinel there.  I talked with these soldiers
for a time; I told them of my sight of the Martians on the previous
evening.  None of them had seen the Martians, and they had but the
vaguest ideas of them, so that they plied me with questions.  They
said that they did not know who had authorised the movements of the
troops; their idea was that a dispute had arisen at the Horse Guards.
The ordinary sapper is a great deal better educated than the common
soldier, and they discussed the peculiar conditions of the possible
fight with some acuteness.  I described the Heat-Ray to them, and they
began to argue among themselves.

"Crawl up under cover and rush 'em, say I," said one.


