My brother went to church at the Foundling Hospital in the morning,
still in ignorance of what had happened on the previous night.  There
he heard allusions made to the invasion, and a special prayer for
peace.  Coming out, he bought a _Referee_.  He became alarmed at the
news in this, and went again to Waterloo station to find out if
communication were restored.  The omnibuses, carriages, cyclists, and
innumerable people walking in their best clothes seemed scarcely
affected by the strange intelligence that the news venders were
disseminating.  People were interested, or, if alarmed, alarmed only
on account of the local residents.  At the station he heard for the
first time that the Windsor and Chertsey lines were now interrupted.
The porters told him that several remarkable telegrams had been
received in the morning from Byfleet and Chertsey stations, but that
these had abruptly ceased.  My brother could get very little precise
detail out of them.

"There's fighting going on about Weybridge" was the extent of their
information.

The train service was now very much disorganised.  Quite a number
of people who had been expecting friends from places on the
South-Western network were standing about the station.  One
grey-headed old gentleman came and abused the South-Western Company
bitterly to my brother.  "It wants showing up," he said.

One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and Kingston,
containing people who had gone out for a day's boating and found the
locks closed and a feeling of panic in the air.  A man in a blue and
white blazer addressed my brother, full of strange tidings.

"There's hosts of people driving into Kingston in traps and carts
and things, with boxes of valuables and all that," he said.  "They
come from Molesey and Weybridge and Walton, and they say there's been
guns heard at Chertsey, heavy firing, and that mounted soldiers have
told them to get off at once because the Martians are coming.  We
heard guns firing at Hampton Court station, but we thought it was
thunder.  What the dickens does it all mean?  The Martians can't get
out of their pit, can they?"

My brother could not tell him.

Afterwards he found that the vague feeling of alarm had spread to
the clients of the underground railway, and that the Sunday
excursionists began to return from all over the South-Western
"lung"--Barnes, Wimbledon, Richmond Park, Kew, and so forth--at
unnaturally early hours; but not a soul had anything more than vague
hearsay to tell of.  Everyone connected with the terminus seemed
ill-tempered.

About five o'clock the gathering crowd in the station was immensely
excited by the opening of the line of communication, which is almost
invariably closed, between the South-Eastern and the South-Western
stations, and the passage of carriage trucks bearing huge guns and
carriages crammed with soldiers.  These were the guns that were
brought up from Woolwich and Chatham to cover Kingston.  There was
an exchange of pleasantries: "You'll get eaten!"  "We're the
beast-tamers!" and so forth.  A little while after that a squad of
police came into the station and began to clear the public off the
platforms, and my brother went out into the street again.


