As Rome grew in fame, power, and dominion, her neighbours, who at first
had taken no heed to the injury which this new republic might do them,
began too late to see their mistake, and desiring to remedy what should
have been remedied before, combined against her to the number of forty
nations. Whereupon the Romans, resorting to a method usual with them in
seasons of peril, appointed a dictator; that is, gave power to one man
to decide without advice, and carry out his resolves without appeal.
Which expedient, as it then enabled them to overcome the dangers
by which they were threatened, so always afterwards proved most
serviceable, when, at any time during the growth of their power,
difficulties arose to embarrass their republic.

In connection with this league against Rome we have first to note, that
when a mischief which springs up either in or against a republic, and
whether occasioned by internal or external causes, has grown to such
proportions that it begins to fill the whole community with alarm, it is
a far safer course to temporize with it than to attempt to quell it by
violence. For commonly those who make this attempt only add fuel to the
flame, and hasten the impending ruin. Such disorders arise in a republic
more often from internal causes than external, either through some
citizen being suffered to acquire undue influence, or from the
corruption of some institution of that republic, which had once been the
life and sinew of its freedom; and from this corruption being allowed to
gain such head that the attempt to check it is more dangerous than to
let it be. And it is all the harder to recognize these disorders in
their beginning, because it seems natural to men to look with favour on
the beginnings of things. Favour of this sort, more than by anything
else, is attracted by those actions which seem to have in them a quality
of greatness, or which are performed by the young. For when in a
republic some young man is seen to come forward endowed with rare
excellence, the eyes of all the citizens are at once turned upon him,
and all, without distinction, concur to do him honour; so that if he
have one spark of ambition, the advantages which he has from nature,
together with those he takes from this favourable disposition of men's
minds, raise him to such a pitch of power, that when the citizens at
last see their mistake it is almost impossible for them to correct it;
and when they do what they can to oppose his influence the only result
is to extend it. Of this I might cite numerous examples, but shall
content myself with one relating to our own city.

Cosimo de' Medici, to whom the house of the Medici in Florence owes
the origin of its fortunes, acquired so great a name from the favour
wherewith his own prudence and the blindness of others invested him,
that coming to be held in awe by the government, his fellow-citizens
deemed it dangerous to offend him, but still more dangerous to let him
alone. Nicolò da Uzzano, his cotemporary, who was accounted well versed
in all civil affairs, but who had made a first mistake in not discerning
the dangers which might grow from the rising influence of Cosimo, would
never while he lived, permit a second mistake to be made in attempting
to crush him; judging that such an attempt would be the ruin of the
State, as in truth it proved after his death. For some who survived him,
disregarding his counsels, combined against Cosimo and banished him from
Florence. And so it came about that the partisans of Cosimo, angry at
the wrong done him, soon afterwards recalled him and made him prince of
the republic, a dignity he never would have reached but for this open
opposition. The very same thing happened in Rome in the case of Cæsar.
For his services having gained him the good-will of Pompey and other
citizens, their favour was presently turned to fear, as Cicero testifies
where he says that "it was late that Pompey began to fear Cæsar." This
fear led men to think of remedies, and the remedies to which they
resorted accelerated the destruction of the republic.

I say, then, that since it is difficult to recognize these disorders in
their beginning, because of the false impressions which things produce
at the first, it is a wiser course when they become known, to temporize
with them than to oppose them; for when you temporize, either they die
out of themselves, or at any rate the injury they do is deferred. And
the prince who would suppress such disorders or oppose himself to their
force and onset, must always be on his guard, lest he help where he
would hinder, retard when he would advance, and drown the plant he
thinks to water. He must therefore study well the symptoms of the
disease; and, if he believe himself equal to the cure, grapple with it
fearlessly; if not, he must let it be, and not attempt to treat it in
any way. For, otherwise, it will fare with him as it fared with those
neighbours of Rome, for whom it would have been safer, after that city
had grown to be so great, to have sought to soothe and restrain her by
peaceful arts, than to provoke her by open war to contrive new means of
attack and new methods of defence. For this league had no other effect
than to make the Romans more united and resolute than before, and to
bethink themselves of new expedients whereby their power was still more
rapidly advanced; among which was the creation of a dictator; for this
innovation not only enabled them to surmount the dangers which then
threatened them, but was afterwards the means of escaping infinite
calamities into which, without it, the republic must have fallen.


