It was never judged a prudent course to peril your whole fortunes where
you put not forth your whole strength; as may happen in more ways than
one. One of these ways was that taken by Tullus and Metius, when each
staked the existence of his country and the credit of his army on the
valour and good fortune of three only of his soldiers, that being an
utterly insignificant fraction of the force at his disposal. For neither
of these kings reflected that all the labours of their predecessors in
framing such institutions for their States, as might, with the aid of
the citizens themselves, maintain them long in freedom, were rendered
futile, when the power to ruin all was left in the hands of so small a
number. No rasher step, therefore, could have been taken, than was taken
by these kings.

A like risk is almost always incurred by those who, on the approach of
an enemy, resolve to defend some place of strength, or to guard the
defiles by which their country is entered. For unless room be found in
this place of strength for almost all your army, the attempt to hold it
will almost always prove hurtful. If you can find room, it will be right
to defend your strong places; but if these be difficult of access, and
you cannot there keep your entire force together, the effort to defend
is mischievous. I come to this conclusion from observing the example
of those who, although their territories be enclosed by mountains and
precipices, have not, on being attacked by powerful enemies, attempted
to fight on the mountains or in the defiles, but have advanced beyond
them to meet their foes; or, if unwilling to advance, have awaited
attack behind their mountains, on level and not on broken ground. The
reason of which is, as I have above explained, that many men cannot be
assembled in these strong places for their defence; partly because a
large number of men cannot long subsist there, and partly because such
places being narrow and confined, afford room for a few only; so that no
enemy can there be withstood, who comes in force to the attack; which
he can easily do, his design being to pass on and not to make a stay;
whereas he who stands on the defensive cannot do so in force, because,
from not knowing when the enemy may enter the confined and sterile
tracts of which I speak, he may have to lodge himself there for a long
time. But should you lose some pass which you had reckoned on holding,
and on the defence of which your country and army have relied, there
commonly follows such panic among your people and among the troops which
remain to you, that you are vanquished without opportunity given for
any display of valour, and lose everything without bringing all your
resources into play.

Every one has heard with what difficulty Hannibal crossed the Alps
which divide France from Lombardy, and afterwards those which separate
Lombardy from Tuscany. Nevertheless the Romans awaited him, in the first
instance on the banks of the Ticino, in the second on the plain of
Arezzo, preferring to be defeated on ground which at least gave them a
chance of victory, to leading their army into mountain fastnesses where
it was likely to be destroyed by the mere difficulties of the ground.
And any who read history with attention will find, that very few capable
commanders have attempted to hold passes of this nature, as well for the
reasons already given, as because to close them all were impossible.
For mountains, like plains, are traversed not only by well-known and
frequented roads, but also by many by-ways, which, though unknown to
strangers, are familiar to the people of the country, under whose
guidance you may always, and in spite of any opposition, be easily
conducted to whatever point you please. Of this we have a recent
instance in the events of the year 1515. For when Francis I. of France
resolved on invading Italy in order to recover the province of Lombardy,
those hostile to his attempt looked mainly to the Swiss, who it was
hoped would stop him in passing through their mountains. But this hope
was disappointed by the event. For leaving on one side two or three
defiles which were guarded by the Swiss, the king advanced by another
unknown pass, and was in Italy and upon his enemies before they knew.
Whereupon they fled terror-stricken into Milan; while the whole
population of Lombardy, finding themselves deceived in their expectation
that the French would be detained in the mountains, went over to their
side.

