After Vespasian, who was then in Judæa, had been proclaimed emperor
by his army, Antonius Primus, who commanded another army in Illyria,
adopted his cause, and marching into Italy against Vitellius who had
been proclaimed emperor in Rome, courageously defeated two armies under
that prince, and occupied Rome; so that Mutianus, who was sent thither
by Vespasian, found everything done to his hand, and all difficulties
surmounted by the valour of Antonius. But all the reward which Antonius
had for his pains, was, that Mutianus forthwith deprived him of his
command of the army, and by degrees diminished his authority in Rome
till none was left him. Thereupon Antonius went to join Vespasian, who
was still in Asia; by whom he was so coldly received and so little
considered, that in despair he put himself to death. And of cases like
this, history is full. Every man living at the present hour knows with
what zeal and courage Gonsalvo of Cordova, while conducting the war in
Naples against the French, conquered and subdued that kingdom for his
master Ferdinand of Aragon; and how his services were requited by
Ferdinand coming from Aragon to Naples, and first of all depriving him
of the command of the army, afterwards of the fortresses, and finally
carrying him back with him to Spain, where soon after he died in
disgrace.

This jealousy, then, is so natural to princes, that they cannot guard
themselves against it, nor show gratitude to those who serving under
their standard have gained great victories and made great conquests on
their behalf. And if it be impossible for princes to free their minds
from such suspicions, there is nothing strange or surprising that a
people should be unable to do so. For as a city living under free
institutions has two ends always before it, namely to acquire liberty
and to preserve it, it must of necessity be led by its excessive passion
for liberty to make mistakes in the pursuit of both these objects. Of
the mistakes it commits in the effort to acquire liberty, I shall speak,
hereafter, in the proper place. Of mistakes committed in the endeavour
to preserve liberty are to be noted, the injuring those citizens who
ought to be rewarded, and the suspecting those who should be trusted.
Now, although in a State which has grown corrupt these errors occasion
great evils, and commonly lead to a tyranny, as happened in Rome
when Cæsar took by force what ingratitude had denied him, they are
nevertheless the cause of much good in the republic which has not been
corrupted, since they prolong the duration of its free institutions, and
make men, through fear of punishment, better and less ambitious. Of all
peoples possessed of great power, the Romans, for the reasons I have
given, have undoubtedly been the least ungrateful, since we have no
other instance of their ingratitude to cite, save that of Scipio. For
both Coriolanus and Camillus were banished on account of the wrongs
which they inflicted on the commons; and though the former was not
forgiven because he constantly retained ill will against the people, the
latter was not only recalled, but for the rest of his life honoured as
a prince. But the ingratitude shown towards Scipio arose from the
suspicion wherewith the citizens came to regard him, which they had
not felt in the case of the others, and which was occasioned by the
greatness of the enemy whom he had overthrown, the fame he had won by
prevailing in so dangerous and protracted a war, the suddenness of his
victories, and, finally, the favour which his youth, together with his
prudence and his other memorable qualities had gained for him. These
qualities were, in truth, so remarkable that the very magistrates,
not to speak of others, stood in awe of his authority, a circumstance
displeasing to prudent citizens, as before unheard of in Rome. In short,
his whole bearing and character were so much out of the common, that
even the elder Cato, so celebrated for his austere virtue, was the first
to declare against him, saying that no city could be deemed free which
contained a citizen who was feared by the magistrates. And since, in
this instance, the Romans followed the opinion of Cato, they merit that
excuse which, as I have said already, should be extended to the prince
or people who are ungrateful through suspicion.

In conclusion it is to be said that while this vice of ingratitude has
its origin either in avarice or in suspicion, commonwealths are rarely
led into it by avarice, and far seldomer than princes by suspicion,
having, as shall presently be shown, far less reason than princes for
suspecting.


