There is no doubt that Kiran had a hand in spoiling the boy. Sharat
often warned her about it, but she would not listen to him. She made a
dandy of him with Sharat's cast-off clothes, and gave him new ones also.
And because she felt drawn towards him, and had a curiosity to know more
about him, she was constantly calling him to her own room. After her
bath and midday meal Kiran would be seated on the bedstead with her
betel-leaf box by her side; and while her maid combed and dried her
hair, Nilkanta would stand in front and recite pieces out of his
repertory with appropriate gesture and song, his elf-locks waving
wildly. Thus the long afternoon hours passed merrily away. Kiran would
often try to persuade Sharat to sit with her as one of the audience,
but Sharat, who had taken a cordial dislike to the boy, refused; nor
could Nilkanta do his part half so well when Sharat was there. His
mother would sometimes be lured by the hope of hearing sacred names in
the recitation; but love of her mid-day sleep speedily overcame
devotion, and she lay lapped in dreams.

The boy often got his ears boxed and pulled by Sharat, but as this was
nothing to what he had been used to as a member of the troupe, he did
not mind it in the least. In his short experience of the world he had
come to the conclusion that, as the earth consisted of land and water,
so human life was made up of eatings and beatings, and that the beatings
largely predominated.

It was hard to tell Nilkanta's age. If it was about fourteen or fifteen,
then his face was too old for his years; if seventeen or eighteen, then
it was too young. He was either a man too early or a boy too late. The
fact was that, joining the theatrical band when very young, he had
played the parts of Radhika, Damayanti, and Sita, and a thoughtful
Providence so arranged things that he grew to the exact stature that his
manager required, and then growth ceased.

Since every one saw how small Nilkanta was, and he himself felt small,
he did not receive due respect for his years. Causes, natural and
artificial, combined to make him sometimes seem immature for seventeen
years, and at other times a mere lad of fourteen but far too knowing
even for seventeen. And as no sign of hair appeared on his face, the
confusion became greater. Either because he smoked or because he used
language beyond his years, his lips puckered into lines that showed him
to be old and hard; but innocence and youth shone in his large eyes. I
fancy that his heart remained young, but the hot glare of publicity had
been a forcing-house that ripened untimely his outward aspect.

In the quiet shelter of Sharat's house and garden at Chandernagore,
Nature had leisure to work her way unimpeded. Nilkanta had lingered in a
kind of unnatural youth, but now he silently and swiftly overpassed that
stage. His seventeen or eighteen years came to adequate revelation. No
one observed the change, and its first sign was this, that when Kiran
treated him like a boy, he felt ashamed. When the gay Kiran one day
proposed that he should play the part of lady's companion, the idea of
woman's dress hurt him, though he could not say why. So now, when she
called for him to act over again his old characters, he disappeared.

It never occurred to Nilkanta that he was even now not much more than a
lad-of-all-work in a strolling company. He even made up his mind to pick
up a little education from Sharat's factor. But, because he was the pet
of his master's wife, the factor could not endure the sight of him.
Also, his restless training made it impossible for him to keep his mind
long engaged; sooner or later, the alphabet did a misty dance before his
eyes. He would sit long enough with an open book on his lap, leaning
against a _champak_ bush beside the Ganges. The waves sighed below,
boats floated past, birds flitted and twittered restlessly above. What
thoughts passed through his mind as he looked down on that book he alone
knew, if indeed he did know. He never advanced from one word to another,
but the glorious thought, that he was actually reading a book, filled
his soul with exultation. Whenever a boat went by, he lifted his book,
and pretended to be reading hard, shouting at the top of his voice. But
his energy dropped as soon as the audience was gone.


