After the death of Shyama Charan, Tarapada said to Bhavani, "Uncle, we
must not live together as we have done for so long, because some
trifling misunderstanding may come at any moment and cause utter
disruption."

Bhavani never imagined, even in his dream, that a day might come when he
would have to manage his own affairs. The world in which he had been
born and bred ever appeared to him complete and entire in itself. It was
an incomprehensible calamity to him that there could be a dividing line
somewhere and that this world of his could be split into two. When he
found that Tarapada was immovable and indifferent to the grief and
dishonour that such a step would bring to the family, he began to rack
his brain to find out how the property could be divided with the least
possible strain.

Tarapada showed surprise at his uncle's anxiety and said that there was
no need to trouble about this, because the division had already been
made in the life-time of his grandfather. Bhavani said in amazement,
"But I know nothing of this!" Tarapada said in answer, "Then you must be
the only one in the whole neighbourhood who does not. For, lest there
should be ruinous litigation after he had gone, my grandfather had
already given a portion of the property to your mother." Bhavani thought
this not unlikely and asked, "What about the house?" Tarapada said, "If
you wish, you can keep this house to yourself and we shall be contented
with the other house in the district town."

As Bhavani had never been to this town-house, he had neither knowledge
of it, nor affection for it. He was astounded at the magnanimity of
Tarapada for so easily relinquishing his right to the house in the
village where they had been brought up. But when Bhavani told everything
to his mother, she struck her forehead with her hand and said: "This is
preposterous! What I got from my husband was my own dowry and its income
is very small. I do not see why you should be deprived of your share in
your father's property."

Bhavani said, "Tarapada is quite positive that his grandfather never
gave us any thing except this land."

Vraja Sundari was astonished and informed her son that her husband had
made two copies of his will, one of which was still lying in her own
box. The box was opened and it was found that there was only the deed of
gift for the property belonging to the mother and nothing else. The copy
of the will had been taken out.

The help of advisers was sought. The man who came to their rescue was
Bagala, the son of their family _guru_. It was the profession of the
father to look after the spiritual needs of the village; the material
side was left to the son. The two of them had divided between themselves
the other world and this. Whatever might be the result for others, they
themselves had nothing to suffer from this division. Bagala said that,
even if the will was missing, the shares in the ancestral property must
be equal, as between the brothers.

Just at this time, a copy of a will made its appearance supporting the
claims of the other side. In this document there was no mention of
Bhavani and the whole property was given to the grandsons at the time
when no son was born to Bhavani. With Bagala as his captain Bhavani set
out on his voyage across the perilous sea of litigation. When his vessel
at last reached harbour his funds were nearly exhausted and the
ancestral property was in the hands of the other party. The land which
was given to his mother had dwindled to such an extent, that it could
barely give them shelter, or keep up the family dignity. Then Tarapada
went away to the district town and they never met again.


