The B.A.  student gravely informed me that they also had heard
that a band of desperate patriots had been formed who would stick
at nothing in order to clear away all obstacles to the success of
__Swadeshi__.

"If," said I, "even one of our countrymen succumbs to these
overbearing desperadoes, that will indeed be a defeat for the
country!"

"We fail to follow you, Maharaja," said the history student.
"'Our country," I tried to explain, "has been brought to death's
door through sheer fear--from fear of the gods down to fear of
the police; and if you set up, in the name of freedom, the fear
of some other bogey, whatever it may be called; if you would
raise your victorious standard on the cowardice of the country by
means of downright oppression, then no true lover of the country
can bow to your decision."

"Is there any country, sir," pursued the history student, "where
submission to Government is not due to fear?"

"The freedom that exists in any country," I replied, "may be
measured by the extent of this reign of fear.  Where its threat
is confined to those who would hurt or plunder, there the
Government may claim to have freed man from the violence of man.
But if fear is to regulate how people are to dress, where they
shall trade, or what they must eat, then is man's freedom of will
utterly ignored, and manhood destroyed at the root."

"Is not such coercion of the individual will seen in other
countries too?"  continued the history student.

"Who denies it?"  I exclaimed.  "But in every country man has
destroyed himself to the extent that he has permitted slavery to
flourish."

"Does it not rather show," interposed a Master of Arts, "that
trading in slavery is inherent in man--a fundamental fact of his
nature?"

"Sandip Babu made the whole thing clear," said a graduate.  "He
gave us the example of Harish Kundu, your neighbouring
__zamindar__.  From his estates you cannot ferret out a single
ounce of foreign salt.  Why?  Because he has always ruled with an
iron hand.  In the case of those who are slaves by nature, the
lack of a strong master is the greatest of all calamities."

"Why, sir!"  chimed in an undergraduate, "have you not heard of
the obstreperous tenant of Chakravarti, the other __zamindar__
close by--how the law was set on him till he was reduced to utter
destitution?  When at last he was left with nothing to eat, he
started out to sell his wife's silver ornaments, but no one dared
buy them.  Then Chakravarti's manager offered him five rupees for
the lot.  They were worth over thirty, but he had to accept or
starve.  After taking over the bundle from him the manager coolly
said that those five rupees would be credited towards his rent!
We felt like having nothing more to do with Chakravarti or his
manager after that, but Sandip Babu told us that if we threw over
all the live people, we should have only dead bodies from the
burning-grounds to carry on the work with!  These live men, he
pointed out, know what they want and how to get it--they are born
rulers.  Those who do not know how to desire for themselves, must
live in accordance with, or die by virtue of, the desires of such
as these.  Sandip Babu contrasted them--Kundu and Chakravarti--
with you, Maharaja.  You, he said, for all your good intentions,
will never succeed in planting __Swadeshi__ within your
territory."

"It is my desire," I said, "to plant something greater than
__Swadeshi__.  I am not after dead logs but living trees--and
these will take time to grow."

"I am afraid, sir," sneered the history student, "that you will
get neither log nor tree.  Sandip Babu rightly teaches that in
order to get, you must snatch.  This is taking all of us some
time to learn, because it runs counter to what we were taught at
school.  I have seen with my own eyes that when a rent-collector
of Harish Kundu's found one of the tenants with nothing which
could be sold up to pay his rent, he was made to sell his young
wife!  Buyers were not wanting, and the __zamindar's__ demand
was satisfied.  I tell you, sir, the sight of that man's distress
prevented my getting sleep for nights together!  But, feel it as
I did, this much I realized, that the man who knows how to get
the money he is out for, even by selling up his debtor's wife, is
a better man than I am.  I confess it is beyond me--I am a
weakling, my eyes fill with tears.  If anybody can save our
country it is these Kundus and these Chakravartis and their
officials!"

I was shocked beyond words.  "If what you say be true," I cried,
"I clearly see that it must be the one endeavour of my life to
save the country from these same Kundus and Chakravartis and
officials.  The slavery that has entered into our very bones is
breaking out, at this opportunity, as ghastly tyranny.  You have
been so used to submit to domination through fear, you have come
to believe that to make others submit is a kind of religion.  My
fight shall be against this weakness, this atrocious cruelty!"
These things, which are so simple to ordinary folk, get so
twisted in the minds of our B.A.'s and M.A.'s, the only purpose
of whose historical quibbles seems to be to torture the truth!


