It was vacation time, and many youths of our village and its
neighbourhood had come home from their schools and colleges.
They attached themselves to Sandip's leadership with enthusiasm,
and some, in their excess of zeal, gave up their studies
altogether.  Many of the boys had been free pupils of my school
here, and some held college scholarships from me in Calcutta.
They came up in a body, and demanded that I should banish foreign
goods from my Suksar market.

I told them I could not do it.

They were sarcastic: "Why, Maharaja, will the loss be too much
for you?"

I took no notice of the insult in their tone, and was about to
reply that the loss would fall on the poor traders and their
customers, not on me, when my master, who was present,
interposed.

"Yes, the loss will be his--not yours, that is clear enough," he
said.

"But for one's country .  ."

"The country does not mean the soil, but the men on it,"
interrupted my master again.  "Have you yet wasted so much as a
glance on what was happening to them?  But now you would dictate
what salt they shall eat, what clothes they shall wear.  Why
should they put up with such tyranny, and why should we let
them?"

"But we have taken to Indian salt and sugar and cloth ourselves."

"You may do as you please to work off your irritation, to keep up
your fanaticism.  You are well off, you need not mind the cost.
The poor do not want to stand in your way, but you insist on
their submitting to your compulsion.  As it is, every moment of
theirs is a life-and-death struggle for a bare living; you cannot
even imagine the difference a few pice means to them--so little
have you in common.  You have spent your whole past in a superior
compartment, and now you come down to use them as tools for the
wreaking of your wrath.  I call it cowardly."

They were all old pupils of my master, so they did not venture to
be disrespectful, though they were quivering with indignation.
They turned to me.  "Will you then be the only one, Maharaja, to
put obstacles in the way of what the country would achieve?"

"Who am I, that I should dare do such a thing?  Would I not
rather lay down my life to help it?"

The M.A.  student smiled a crooked smile, as he asked: "May we
enquire what you are actually doing to help?"

"I have imported Indian mill-made yarn and kept it for sale in my
Suksar market, and also sent bales of it to markets belonging to
neighbouring __zamindars__."

"But we have been to your market, Maharaja," the same student
exclaimed, "and found nobody buying this yarn."

"That is neither my fault nor the fault of my market.  It only
shows the whole country has not taken your vow."

"That is not all," my master went on.  "It shows that what you
have pledged yourselves to do is only to pester others.  You want
dealers, who have not taken your vow, to buy that yarn; weavers,
who have not taken your vow, to make it up; then their wares
eventually to be foisted on to consumers who, also, have not
taken your vow.  The method?  Your clamour, and the
__zamindars'__ oppression.  The result: all righteousness
yours, all privations theirs!"

"And may we venture to ask, further, what your share of the
privation has been?"  pursued a science student.

"You want to know, do you?"  replied my master.  "It is Nikhil
himself who has to buy up that Indian mill yarn; he has had to
start a weaving school to get it woven; and to judge by his past
brilliant business exploits, by the time his cotton fabrics leave
the loom their cost will be that of cloth-of-gold; so they will
only find a use, perhaps, as curtains for his drawing-room, even
though their flimsiness may fail to screen him.  When you get
tired of your vow, you will laugh the loudest at their artistic
effect.  And if their workmanship is ever truly appreciated at
all, it will be by foreigners."

I have known my master all my life, but have never seen him so
agitated.  I could see that the pain had been silently
accumulating in his heart for some time, because of his
surpassing love for me, and that his habitual self-possession had
become secretly undermined to the breaking point.

"You are our elders," said the medical student.  "It is unseemly
that we should bandy words with you.  But tell us, pray, finally,
are you determined not to oust foreign articles from your
market?"

"I will not," I said, "because they are not mine."

"Because that will cause you a loss!"  smiled the M.A.  student.

"Because he, whose is the loss, is the best judge," retorted my
master.

With a shout of __Bande Mataram__ they left us.


