At once an awakening thrill seemed to run through the group
of officers and shook them from their lethargy; the languid poses
straightened up, faces became animated and they began to talk.

Although the shower was continuing as heavy as ever, the Major
affirmed that it was not so dark, and Lieutenant Otto announced
positively that the weather was clearing up.  Even Mademoiselle
Fifi seemed unable to keep still.  He rose and sat down again.  His
harsh and clear eye was looking for something to break; suddenly,
glaring at the lady with the mustache, the young prig drew his
revolver:  "You shall not witness it, you!" said he, and, without
leaving his seat, he aimed.  Two bullets fired in rapid succession
put out the eyes of the portrait.

Then he exclaimed:  "Let us explode a mine!"  And at once the
conversation was interrupted, as if a powerful and new curiosity
had taken hold of every one present.

A mine, that was his invention, his way of destroying, his favorite
amusement.

When he hurriedly left his chateau, Comte Fernand d'Armoy d'Uville,
the legitimate owner, had had no time to take with him nor hide
away anything except the silver-plate, which he had stowed away in
a hole made in a wall.  Now as he was immensely wealthy and lived
in great luxury, his large salon, the door of which communicated
with the dining-room, presented the appearance of a Picture Gallery
before the precipitate flight of the master.

Priceless paintings and aquarelles were hanging on the walls, while
on the tables, the étagères and the elegant cabinets, thousands of
bric à brac and bibelots, statuettes, Dresden and Chinese vases,
old ivories and Venice pottery peopled the large room with their
precious and odd multitude.

Hardly any were left by this time.  Not that they had been stolen;
the Major, Graf Farlsberg, would not have permitted nor tolerated
it; but Mademoiselle Fifi once in a while exploded a mine; and on
such occasions all the officers enjoyed themselves thoroughly for
five minutes.

The little Markgraf went to the salon to fetch what he needed; he
brought in a tiny and graceful Chinese tea-pot of the Rose family,
which he filled with gun powder, and through the neck of which he
carefully introduced a long piece of tinder, lighted it and, running,
carried this infernal machine into the next room.

Then he returned quickly and closed the door behind him.  All the
Germans stood up and waited, their faces wreathed in childlike smiles
of curiosity, and as soon as the explosion shook the Chateau, they
hurried in all at once.

Mademoiselle Fifi, who had been the first one to rush in, was
deliriously clapping his hands in front of a terra cotta Venus,
whose head at last had been blown off; and each picked up broken
pieces of China, wondering at the strange indentation of the
fragments, examining the new damage done, claiming that some of
the damage had been caused by previous explosions.  And the Major
was contemplating, with a paternal look, the large salon upset by
this Neronian firework and strewn with the debris of the objects of
Art.  He came out first, declaring good- naturedly:  "It was very
successful this time!"

But such a spout of smoke had invaded the dining-room, mixing
with the smoke of tobacco, that it was impossible to breathe.  The
Commander opened the window, and all the officers, who had come
back to drink a last glass of cognac, crowded near it.

The damp air blew into the room bringing in a kind of water dust,
which sprayed and powdered the beards, and a smell of inundation.
They were looking at the tall trees bending under the shower, the
broad valley darkened by this outflow of the black low clouds[*],
and in the distance the Church spire rising like a gray point in
the pelting rain.

Since the arrival of the Germans, the Church bell had not rung.
It was in fact the only resistance with which the invaders met in
that neighborhood, the resistance of the bell-tower.  The Curate
had not refused to receive and feed Prussian soldiers; he had even,
on several occasions, accepted to drink a bottle of beer or claret
with the enemy Commander, who often used him as a benevolent
intermediary.  But it was useless to ask him for a single ring of
his bell; he would rather have faced a firing squad.  That was his
way of protesting against invasion, a peaceful protest, the protest
of silence, the only one, said he, that became a priest, a man of
peace and not of blood.  And everybody for ten miles around praised
the firmness, the heroism of Father Chantavoine, who dared to affirm
the public mourning and proclaim it by the obstinate mutism of his
Church.

The entire village, enthusiastic about this resistance, was ready
to support and back up its pastor to the bitter end, to risk
anything, considering this tacit protest as a safeguard of the
national honor.  It seemed to the peasants that in this way they
deserved better of their country than Belfort or Strasbourg, that
they had given just as good an example, that the name of their hamlet
would remain immortal for it; and with that single exception, they
refused nothing to the victorious Prussians.

The Commander and his officers laughed in private at this manifestation
of inoffensive courage, and as the entire neighborhood showed
themselves obliging to them and docile to their orders, they
willingly tolerated the priest's silent patriotism.

